Cambridge IELTS 3
Examination papers from the
University of Cambridge
Local Examination Syndicate

C AMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS

PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK
40 West 20th Street, New York NY 10011-4211, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
Ruiz de Alarcon 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain
Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa
http://www.cambridge.org
© Cambridge University Press 2002
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory
exception and to the provisions of relevant
collective licensing agreements, no reproduction
of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2002
Reprinted 2003 (twice)
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge
Typeface Times NRMT 11/13pt System QuarkXPress™ [SE]
ISBN 0 521 01333 X Student's Book with answers
ISBN 0 521 01335 6 Cassette Set
ISBN 0 521 01336 4 Audio CD Set
ISBN 0 521 01337 5 Self-study Pack

Contents
Acknowledgements
Introduction
Test 1

8

Test 2

30

Test 3

54

Test 4

76

iv

1

General Training: Reading and Writing Test A

100

General Training: Reading and Writing Test B

114

Tapescripts
Answer key

127
149

Model and sample answers for writing tasks
Sample answer sheets

171

159

Acknowledgements
The authors and publishers are grateful to the authors, publishers and others who have given permission for the use of
copyright material identified in the text. It has not been possible to identify the sources of all the material used and in such
cases the publishers would welcome information from copyright owners. Apologies are expressed for any omissions.

Text p.24 from an extract 'Getting into the System' in How to Get a PhD 3rd edition by Estelle Phillips and
Derek Pugh, published in 1994 by © Open University Press 2000; Text p.38-39 from adapted text A Hard
earned Pat for a True Digger' by John Feehan, Volume 20, published in 1994 by © Australian Geographic;
Text 43-44 an extract from 'Natural Resource Management - the case of Farm Subsidies' by Frances
Cairncross, Published in 1995 by © Kogan Page; Text p.60 an extract from 'Collecting the 20th Century' from
the Department of Ethnography by Frances Carey, published in by The British Museum Press; Text p.84-85 an
extract 'Must Megacities mean Megapollutiori, from © The Economist Newspaper Limited, London September
1994; Text p.88-89 an extract from 'Nelson's Column, Votes for Women by Mary Alexander, published in 1992
by © The Illustrated London News; Text p.92-92 Reprinted by Permission of Harvard Business Review, from
'Management: A Book of Readings' by Harold Koontz, Volume 36, March-April 1958. Copyright © 1958 by
the Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation; all rights reserved; Text p. 100—101 Enrolment details,
conditions and fees, published in 1995 by The Francis King School of English; Text p. 106 an extract from 'the
University of Waikato Language Institute New Zealand', published in 1995 by © Waikato University; Text p.
122-123 © Alan Mitchell/Times Newspapers Limited, London 16 October 1995.
The publishers are grateful to the following for permission to include photographs:
Art Directors & TRIP/R Nichols for p. 47; Robert Harding Picture Library for p. 58; Tony Waltham for pp. 84, 108(r); Paul
Mulcahy for p. 19; Popperfoto for pp. 88, 106; Science Photo Library/Crown Copyright/Health and Safety Laboratory for p.
108(1); John Reader for p. 38; South American Pictures/Marion & Tony Morrison for p. 60.
Picture research by Valerie Mulcahy
Design concept by Peter Ducker MSTD
Cover design by John Dunne
The cassettes and audio CDs which accompany this book were recorded at Studio AVP, London.

Introduction
The International English Language Testing System (IELTS) is widely recognised as a reliable
means of assessing whether candidates are ready to study or train in the medium of English. IELTS
is owned by three partners, the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate, the British
Council and IDP Education Australia (through its subsidiary company IELTS Australia Pty
Limited). The main purpose of this book of Practice Tests is to give future IELTS candidates an idea
of whether their English is at the required level. Further information on IELTS can be found in the
IELTS Handbook available free of charge from IELTS centres.

WHAT IS THE TEST FORMAT?
IELTS consists of six modules. All candidates take the same Listening and Speaking modules. There
is a choice of Reading and Writing modules according to whether a candidate is taking the
Academic or General Training version of the test.
Academic
For candidates taking the test for entry to
undergraduate or postgraduate studies or for
professional reasons

Genera] Training
For candidates taking the test for entry to
vocational or training programmes not at
degree level, for admission to secondary
schools and for immigration purposes

The test modules are taken in the following order:
Listening
4 sections, 40 items
30 minutes
Academic Reading
3 sections, 40 items
60 minutes
Academic Writing
2 tasks
60 minutes

OR
OR

General Training Reading
3 sections, 40 items
60 minutes
General Training Writing
2 tasks
60 minutes

Speaking
11 to 14 minutes
Total test time
2 hours 44 minutes

1

Introduction
Listening
This is in four sections, each with 10 questions. The first two sections are concerned with social
needs. There is a conversation between two speakers and then a monologue. The final two sections
are concerned with situations related to educational or training contexts. There is a conversation
between up to four people and then a monologue.
A variety of question types is used, including: multiple choice, short-answer questions, sentence
completion, notes/chart/table completion, labelling a diagram, classification, matching.
Candidates hear the recording once only and answer the questions as they listen. Ten minutes are
allowed at the end to transfer answers to the answer sheet.
Academic Reading
There are three reading passages, of increasing difficulty, on topics of general interest and
candidates have to answer 40 questions. The passages are taken from magazines, journals, books
and newspapers. At least one text contains detailed logical argument.
A variety of question types is used, including: multiple choice, short-answer questions, sentence
completion, notes/chart/table completion, labelling a diagram, classification, matching lists/phrases,
choosing suitable paragraph headings from a list, identification of writer’s views/attitudes - yes, no,
not given, or true, false, not given.
General Training Reading
Candidates have to answer 40 questions. There are three sections of increasing difficulty, containing
texts taken from notices, advertisements, leaflets, newspapers, instruction manuals, books and
magazines. The first section contains texts relevant to basic linguistic survival in English, with tasks
mainly concerned with providing factual information. The second section focuses on the training
context and involves texts of more complex language. The third section involves reading more
extended texts, with a more complex structure, but with the emphasis on descriptive and instructive
rather than argumentative texts.
A variety of question types is used, including: multiple choice, short-answer questions, sentence
completion, notes/chart/table completion, labelling a diagram, classification, matching lists/phrases,
choosing suitable paragraph headings from a list, identification of writer’s views/attitudes - yes, no,
not given, or true, false, not given.
Academic Writing
There are two tasks and it is suggested that candidates spend about 20 minutes on Task 1, which
requires them to write at least 150 words, and 40 minutes on Task 2-250 words. The assessment of
Task 2 carries more weight in marking than Task 1.
In Task 1 candidates are asked to look at a diagram or table and to present the information in their
own words. They are assessed on their ability to organise, present and possibly compare data,
describe the stages of a process, describe an object or event, explain how something works.

2

Introduction
In Task 2 candidates are presented with a point of view, argument or problem. They are assessed
on their ability to present a solution to the problem, present and justify an opinion, compare and
contrast evidence and opinions, evaluate and challenge ideas, evidence or arguments.
Candidates are also judged on their ability to write in an appropriate style.
General Training Writing
There are two tasks and it is suggested that candidates spend about 20 minutes on Task 1, which
requires them to write at least 150 words, and 40 minutes on Task 2-250 words. The assessment of
Task 2 carries more weight in marking than Task 1.
In Task 1 candidates are asked to respond to a given problem with a letter requesting information
or explaining a situation. They are assessed on their ability to engage in personal correspondence,
elicit and provide general factual information, express needs, wants, likes and dislikes, express
opinions, complaints, etc.
In Task 2 candidates are presented with a point of view, argument or problem. They are assessed
on their ability to provide general factual information, outline a problem and present a solution,
present and justify an opinion, evaluate and challenge ideas, evidence or arguments.
Candidates are also judged on their ability to write in an appropriate style.
Speaking
The Speaking module takes between 11 and 14 minutes. It consists of an oral interview between the
candidate and an examiner.
There are three main parts:
Part 1

The candidate and the examiner introduce themselves and then the candidate answers general
questions about themselves, their home/family, their job/studies, their interests and a wide range of
similar familiar topic areas. This part lasts between four and five minutes.
Part 2

The candidate is given a task card with prompts and is asked to talk on a particular topic.
The candidate has one minute to prepare and they can make some notes if they wish, before
speaking for between one and two minutes. The examiner then asks one or two rounding-off
questions.
Part 3

The examiner and the candidate engage in a discussion of more abstract issues and concepts, which
are thematically linked to the topic prompt in Part 2. The discussion lasts between four and five
minutes.
The Speaking module assesses whether candidates can communicate effectively in English. The
assessment takes into account Fluency and Coherence, Lexical Resource, Grammatical Range and
Accuracy, and Pronunciation.

3

Introduction

HOW IS IELTS SCORED?
IELTS results are reported on a nine-band scale. In addition to the score for overall language ability
IELTS provides a score, in the form of a profile, for each of the four skills (Listening, Reading,
Writing and Speaking). These scores are also reported on a nine-band scale. All scores are recorded
on the Test Report Form along with details of the candidate’s nationality, first language and date of
birth. Each Overall Band Score corresponds to a descriptive statement which gives a summary of the
English language ability of a candidate classified at that level. The nine bands and their descriptive
statements are as follows:
9 Expert User — Has fully operational command of the language: appropriate, accurate and fluent with complete
understanding.
8 Very Good User - Has fully operational command of the language with only occasional unsystematic
inaccuracies and inappropriacies. Misunderstandings may occur in unfamiliar situations. Handles complex
detailed argumentation well.
7 Good User - Has operational command of the language, though occasional inaccuracies, inappropriacies and
misunderstandings in some situations. Generally handles complex language well and understands detailed
reasoning.
6 Competent User - Has generally effective command of the language despite some inaccuracies, inappropriacies
and misunderstandings. Can use and understand fairly complex language, particularly in familiar situations.
5 Modest User — Has partial command of the language, coping with overall meaning in most situations, though is
likely to make many mistakes. Should be able to handle basic communication in own field.
4 Limited User — Basic competence is limited to familiar situations. Has frequent problems in understanding and
expression. Is not able to use complex language.
3 Extremely Limited User - Conveys and understands only general meaning in very familiar situations. Frequent
breakdowns in communication occur.
2 Intermittent User - No real communication is possible except for the most basic information using isolated
words or short formulae in familiar situations and to meet immediate needs. Has great difficulty understanding
spoken and written English.
1 Non User - Essentially has no ability to use the language beyond possibly a few isolated words.
0 Did not attempt the test. — No assessable information.

Most universities and colleges in the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand and Canada accept
an IELTS Overall Band Score of 6.0 or 6.5 for entry to academic programmes. IELTS scores are
increasingly being recognised by universities in the USA.

4

Introduction

MARKING THE PRACTICE TESTS
Listening and Reading
The Answer key is on pages 149-158.
Each item in the Listening and Reading tests is worth one mark. There are no half marks. Put a
tick (a ) next to each correct answer and a cross (r ) next to each wrong one. Each tick will equal
one mark.
Single letter/number answers
• For questions where the answer is a single letter or number, you should write only one answer. If
you have written more than one, the answer must be marked wrong.
Longer answers
• Only the answers given in the Answer key are correct. If you write something different to the
answer given in the key, it should be marked wrong.
• Answers may be written in upper or lower case.
• Sometimes part of the correct answer is given in brackets. Words in brackets are optional - they
are correct, but not necessary.
• Alternative words or phrases within an answer are indicated by a single slash (/).
• Sometimes there are alternative correct answers to a question. In these cases the possible answers
are separated by a double slash (//). If you have written any one of these possible answers, your
answer is correct.
• You will find additional notes about individual questions in the Answer key.
Spelling
• All answers require correct spelling unless alternative spellings are stated in the Answer key. If a
word is spelt differently from the Answer key, it should be marked wrong.
• Both US and UK spelling are acceptable.
Writing
Obviously it is not possible for you to give yourself a mark for the Writing tasks. For Tests 2 and 3
and GT Test A we have provided model answers (written by an examiner) at the back of the book. It
is important to note that these show just one way of completing the task, out of many possible
approaches. For Tests 1 and 4 and GT Test B we have provided sample answers (written by
candidates), showing their score and the examiner’s comments. We hope that both of these will give
you an insight into what is required for the Writing module.

5

Introduction

HOW SHOULD YOU INTERPRET YOUR SCORES?
In the Answer key at the end of each set of Listening and Reading answers you will find a chart
which will help you assess if, on the basis of your practice test results, you are ready to take the
IELTS exam.
In interpreting your score, there are a number of points you should bear in mind.
Your performance in the real IELTS test will be reported in two ways: there will be a Band Score
from 1 to 9 for each of the modules and an Overall Band Score from 1 to 9, which is the average of
your scores in the four modules.
However, institutions considering your application are advised to look at both the Overall Band
and the Bands for each module. They do this in order to see if you have the language skills needed
for a particular course of study. For example, if your course has a lot of reading and writing, but no
lectures, listening comprehension might be less important and a score of 5 in Listening might be
acceptable if the Overall Band Score was 7. However, for a course where there are lots of lectures
and spoken instructions, a score of 5 in Listening might be unacceptable even though the Overall
Band Score was 7.
Once you have marked your papers you should have some idea of whether your Listening and
Reading skills are good enough for you to try the real IELTS test. If you did well enough in one
module but not in others, you will have to decide for yourself whether you are ready to take the
proper test yet.
The Practice Tests have been checked so that they are about the same level of difficulty as the real
IELTS test. However, we cannot guarantee that your score in the Practice Test papers will be
reflected in the real IELTS test. The Practice Tests can only give you an idea of your possible future
performance and it is ultimately up to you to make decisions based on your score.
Different institutions accept different IELTS scores for different types of courses. We have based
our recommendations on the average scores which the majority of institutions accept. The institution
to which you are applying may, of course, require a higher or lower score than most other
institutions.
Sample answers or model answers are provided for the Writing tasks. The sample answers were
written by IELTS candidates; each answer has been given a band score and the candidate’s
performance is described. Please note that the examiner’s guidelines for marking the Writing scripts
are very detailed. There are many different ways a candidate may achieve a particular band score.
The model answers were written by an examiner as examples of very good answers, but it is
important to understand that they are just one example out of many possible approaches.

6

Introduction
Further information
For more information about IELTS or any other UCLES examination write to:
EFL Division
UCLES
1 Hills Road
Cambridge
CB1 2EU
England
Telephone: +44 1223 553311
Fax: +44 1223 460278
e-mail: efl@ucles.org.uk
http://www.cambridge-efl.org.uk

7

Test 1
LISTENING
SECTION 1

Questions 1-10

Complete the notes below.

8

Listening

SECTON 2

Questions 11-20

Questions 11 and 12
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.
11

Who is Mrs Sutton worried about?
……………………………………………..

12

What is the name for a group of family doctors working in the same building together?

………………………………………..
Questions 13-17
Complete the table below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS OR A NUMBER for each answer.
Name of Health
Centre

Number of doctors

Other information

Information about
doctors

Dean End

13.............................

Appointment system
15.............................
than South Hay

Dr Jones is good with
16.............................
patients.
Dr Shaw is good with
small children.

South Hay

14.............................

Building less modern than Dr Williams helps people
Dean End
with 17.............................
………………….

9

Test 1

Questions 18-20
Question 18
Write NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS OR A NUMBER.
Doctors start seeing patients at the Health Centre from........................o’clock.

Question 19
Choose TWO letters A-E.
Which TWO groups of patients receive free medication?
A people over 17 years old
B unemployed people
C non-UK residents
D people over 60 years old
E pregnant women

Question 20
Write NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS OR A NUMBER
The charge for one item of medication is about £..................................

10

Listening

SECTION 3

Questions 21-30

Complete the notes below.
Write NUMBERS AND/OR NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.

11

Test 1

SECTION 4

Questions 31-40

Questions 31-36
Choose the correct letters A-C.
31

Which column of the bar chart represents the figures quoted?

32

According to the speaker, the main cause of back pain in women is
A pregnancy.
B osteoporosis.
C lack of exercise.

33 As treatment for back pain the Clinic mainly recommends
A pain killers.
B relaxation therapy.
C exercise routines.
34

The back is different from other parts of the body because
A
B
C

35

Bed rest is advised
A
B
C

36

for a maximum of two days.
for extreme pain only.
for pain lasting more than two days.

Being overweight
A
B
C

12

it is usually better at self-repair.
a back injury is usually more painful.
its response to injury often results in more damage.

is a major source of back pain.
worsens existing back pain.
reduces the effectiveness of exercise.

Listening

Questions 37-40
Choose the correct letters A—C.

Strongly
recommended
A

Recommended
in certain
circumstances
B

Not
recommended
C

Example
Diet if overweight

Answer
[A]

B

C

37 Buy special orthopaedic
chairs

A

B

C

Example
Buy orthopaedic
mattresses

A

Answer
[B]

C

38 Buy shock-absorbing
inserts

A

B

C

39 Wear flat shoes

A

B

C

40 Buy TENS machine

A

B

C

13

Test 1

READING_
READING PASSAGE 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-14 which are based on Reading Passage 1 on
the following pages.

Questions 1-4
Reading Passage 1 has six paragraphs A-F.
Choose the most suitable headings for paragraphs B-E from the list of headings below.
Write the appropriate numbers i-ix in boxes 1—4 on your answer sheet.
List of Headings
How the reaction principle works
ii
The impact of the reaction principle
iii
Writers’ theories of the reaction principle
iv
Undeveloped for centuries
v
The first rockets
vi
The first use of steam
vii Rockets for military use
viii Developments of fire
ix
What’s next?
i

Example
Paragraph A
1

Paragraph B

2

Paragraph C

3

Paragraph D

4

Paragraph E

Example
Paragraph F

14

Answer
ii

Answer
ix

Reading

THE ROCKET - FROM EAST TO WEST
A The concept of the rocket, or rather the mechanism behind the idea of propelling an

object into the air, has been around for well over two thousand years. However, it
wasn’t until the discovery of the reaction principle, which was the key to space travel
and so represents one of the great milestones in the history of scientific thought, that
rocket technology was able to develop. Not only did it solve a problem that had
intrigued man for ages, but, more importantly, it literally opened the door to
exploration of the universe.

B

An intellectual breakthrough, brilliant though it may be, does not automatically
ensure that the transition is made from theory to practice. Despite the fact that
rockets had been used sporadically for several hundred years, they remained a
relatively minor artefact of civilisation until the twentieth century. Prodigious efforts,
accelerated during two world wars, were required before the technology of primitive
rocketry could be translated into the reality of sophisticated astronauts. It is strange
that the rocket was generally ignored by writers of fiction to transport their heroes to
mysterious realms beyond the Earth, even though it had been commonly used in
fireworks displays in China since the thirteenth century. The reason is that nobody
associated the reaction principle with the idea of travelling through space to a
neighbouring world.

C A simple analogy can help us to understand how a rocket operates. It is much like a
machine gun mounted on the rear of a boat. In reaction to the backward discharge of
bullets, the gun, and hence the boat, move forwards. A rocket motor’s ‘bullets’ are
minute, high-speed particles produced by burning propellants in a suitable chamber.
The reaction to the ejection of these small particles causes the rocket to move
forwards. There is evidence that the reaction principle was applied practically well
before the rocket was invented. In his Noctes Atticae or Greek Nights, Aulus Gellius
describes ‘the pigeon of Archytas’, an invention dating back to about 360 BC.
Cylindrical in shape, made of wood, and hanging from string, it was moved to and fro
by steam blowing out from small exhaust ports at either end. The reaction to the
discharging steam provided the bird with motive power.
D

The invention of rockets is linked inextricably with the invention of ‘black powder’.
Most historians of technology credit the Chinese with its discovery. They base their
belief on studies of Chinese writings or on the notebooks of early Europeans who
settled in or made long visits to China to study its history and civilisation. It is
probable that, some time in the tenth century, black powder was first compounded
from its basic ingredients of saltpetre, charcoal and sulphur. But this does not mean
that it was immediately used to propel rockets. By the thirteenth century, powderpropelled fire arrows had become rather common. The Chinese relied on this type of
technological development to produce incendiary projectiles of many sorts,

15

Test 1
explosive grenades and possibly cannons to repel their enemies. One such weapon
was the ‘basket of fire’ or, as directly translated from Chinese, the ‘arrows like flying
leopards’. The 0.7 metre-long arrows, each with a long tube of gunpowder attached
near the point of each arrow, could be fired from a long, octagonal-shaped basket at
the same time and had a range of 400 paces. Another weapon was the ‘arrow as a
flying sabre’, which could be fired from crossbows. The rocket, placed in a similar
position to other rocket-propelled arrows, was designed to increase the range. A
small iron weight was attached to the 1.5m bamboo shaft, just below the feathers, to
increase the arrow’s stability by moving the centre of gravity to a position below the
rocket. At a similar time, the Arabs had developed the ‘egg which moves and burns’.
This ‘egg’ was apparently full of gunpowder and stabilised by a 1.5m tail. It was fired
using two rockets attached to either side of this tail.
E

It was not until the eighteenth century that Europe became seriously interested in the
possibilities of using the rocket itself as a weapon of war and not just to propel other
weapons. Prior to this, rockets were used only in pyrotechnic displays. The incentive
for the more aggressive use of rockets came not from within the European continent
but from far-away India, whose leaders had built up a corps of rocketeers and used
rockets successfully against the British in the late eighteenth century. The Indian
rockets used against the British were described by a British Captain serving in India
as ‘an iron envelope about 200 millimetres long and 40 millimetres in diameter with
sharp points at the top and a 3m-long bamboo guiding stick’. In the early nineteenth
century the British began to experiment with incendiary barrage rockets. The British
rocket differed from the Indian version in that it was completely encased in a stout,
iron cylinder, terminating in a conical head, measuring one metre in diameter and
having a stick almost five metres long and constructed in such a way that it could be
firmly attached to the body of the rocket. The Americans developed a rocket,
complete with its own launcher, to use against the Mexicans in the mid-nineteenth
century. A long cylindrical tube was propped up by two sticks and fastened to the top
of the launcher, thereby allowing the rockets to be inserted and lit from the other
end. However, the results were sometimes not that impressive as the behaviour of
the rockets in flight was less than predictable.

F

Since then, there have been huge developments in rocket technology, often with
devastating results in the forum of war. Nevertheless, the modern day space
programs owe their success to the humble beginnings of those in previous centuries
who developed the foundations of the reaction principle. Who knows what it will be
like in the future?

16

Reading

Questions 5 and 6
Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 5 and 6 on your answer sheet.
5 The greatest outcome of the discovery of the reaction principle was that
A rockets could be propelled into the air.
B space travel became a reality.
C a major problem had been solved.
D bigger rockets were able to be built.
6

According to the text, the greatest progress in rocket technology was made
A from the tenth to the thirteenth centuries.
B from the seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries.
C from the early nineteenth to the late nineteenth century.
D from the late nineteenth century to the present day.

Questions 7-10
From the information in the text, indicate who FIRST invented or used the items in the list
below.
Write the appropriate letters A-E in boxes 7-10 on your answer sheet.
NB You may use any letter more than once.
Example
rockets for displays
7

Answer
A

black powder

8 rocket-propelled arrows for fighting
9 rockets as war weapons
10

the rocket launcher
FIRST invented or used by

A
B
C
D
E

the Chinese
the Indians
the British
the Arabs
the Americans

17

Test 1

Questions 11-14
Look at the drawings of different projectiles below, A-H, and the names of types of projectiles given
in the passage, Questions 11-14. Match each name with one drawing.
Write the appropriate letters A-H in boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet.
Example
The Greek ‘pigeon of Archytas’
11

The Chinese ‘basket of fire’

12

The Arab ‘egg which moves and burns’

13 The Indian rocket
14 The British barrage rocket

18

Answer
C

Reading

READING PASSAGE 2
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 15-28 which are based on Reading Passage 2 below.

The Risks of Cigarette
Smoke
Discovered in the early 1800s and named nicotianine, the oily essence now called
nicotine is the main active insredient of tobacco. Nicotine, however, is only a small
component of cigarette smoke, which contains more than 4,700 chemical compounds,
including 43 cancer-causing substances. In recent times, scientific research has been
providing evidence that years of cigarette smoking vastly increases the risk of
developing fatal medical conditions.
In addition to being responsible for more than 85 per cent of lung cancers, smoking is
associated with cancers of, amongst others, the mouth, stomach and kidneys, and is
thought to cause about 14 per cent of leukemia and cervical cancers. In 1990, smoking
caused more than 84,000 deaths, mainly resulting from such problems as pneumonia,
bronchitis and influenza. Smoking, it is believed, is responsible for 30 per cent of all
deaths from cancer and clearly represents the most important preventable cause of
cancer in countries like the United States today.
Passive smoking, the breathing in of the side-stream smoke from the burning of
tobacco between puffs or of the smoke exhaled by a smoker, also causes a serious
health risk. A report published in 1992 by the US Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) emphasized the health dangers, especially from side-stream smoke. This type of
smoke contains more, smaller particles and is therefore more likely to be deposited
deep in the lungs. On the basis of this report, the EPA has classified environmental
tobacco smoke in the highest risk category for causing cancer.
As an illustration of the health risks, in the case of a married couple where one partner
is a smoker and one a non-smoker, the latter is believed to have a 30 per cent higher
risk of death from heart disease because of passive smoking. The risk of lung cancer
also increases over the years of exposure and the figure jumps to 80 per cent if the
spouse has been smoking four packs a day for 20 years. It has been calculated that 17
per cent of cases of lung cancer can be attributed to high levels of exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke during childhood and adolescence.

19

Test 1
A more recent study by researchers at the University of California at San Francisco (UCSF)
has shown that second-hand cigarette smoke does more harm to non-smokers than to
smokers. Leaving aside the philosophical question of whether anyone should have to
breathe someone else’s cigarette smoke, the report suggests that the smoke experienced
by many people in their daily lives is enough to produce substantial adverse effects on a
person’s heart and lungs.
The report, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (AMA), was
based on the researchers’ own earlier research but also includes a review of studies over
the past few years. The American Medical Association represents about half of all US
doctors and is a strong opponent of smoking. The study suggests that people who smoke
cigarettes are continually damaging their cardiovascular system, which adapts in order to
compensate for the effects of smoking. It further states that people who do not smoke do
not have the benefit of their system adapting to the smoke inhalation. Consequently, the
effects of passive smoking are far greater on non-smokers than on smokers.
This report emphasizes that cancer is not caused by a single element in cigarette smoke;
harmful effects to health are caused by many components. Carbon monoxide, for example,
competes with oxygen in red blood cells and interferes with the blood’s ability to deliver lifegiving oxygen to the heart. Nicotine and other toxins in cigarette smoke activate small
blood cells called platelets, which increases the likelihood of blood clots, thereby affecting
blood circulation throughout the body.
The researchers criticize the practice of some scientific consultants who work with the
tobacco industry for assuming that cigarette smoke has the same impact on smokers as it
does on non-smokers. They argue that those scientists are underestimating the damage
done by passive smoking and, in support of their recent findings, cite some previous
research which points to passive smoking as the cause for between 30,000 and 60,000
deaths from heart attacks each year in the United States. This means that passive smoking
is the third most preventable cause of death after active smoking and alcohol-related
diseases.
The study argues that the type of action needed against passive smoking should be similar
to that being taken against illegal drugs and AIDS (SIDA). The UCSF researchers maintain
that the simplest and most cost-effective action is to establish smoke-free work places,
schools and public places.

20

Reading

Questions 15-17
Choose the appropriate letters A—D and write them in boxes 15—17 on your answer sheet.
15 According to information in the text, leukaemia and pneumonia
A are responsible for 84,000 deaths each year.
B are strongly linked to cigarette smoking.
C are strongly linked to lung cancer.
D result in 30 per cent of deaths per year.
16 According to information in the text, intake of carbon monoxide
A
B
C
D

inhibits the flow of oxygen to the heart.
increases absorption of other smoke particles.
inhibits red blood cell formation.
promotes nicotine absorption.

17 According to information in the text, intake of nicotine encourages
A
B
C
D

blood circulation through the body.
activity of other toxins in the blood.
formation of blood clots.
an increase of platelets in the blood.

Questions 18-21
Do the following statements reflect the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 2?
In boxes 18-21 on your answer sheet write
YES
if the statement reflects the claims of the writer
NO
if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
18 Thirty per cent of deaths in the United States are caused by smoking-related diseases.
19 If one partner in a marriage smokes, the other is likely to take up smoking.
20 Teenagers whose parents smoke are at risk of getting lung cancer at some time during their
lives.
21 Opponents of smoking financed the UCSF study.

21

Test 1

Questions 22-24
Choose ONE phrase from the list of phrases A—J below to complete each of the following sentences (Questions
22-24).
Write the appropriate letters in boxes 22—24 on your answer sheet.
22

Passive smoking ...

23

Compared with a non-smoker, a smoker ...

24

The American Medical Association ...

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

includes reviews of studies in its reports.
argues for stronger action against smoking in public places.
is one of the two most preventable causes of death.
is more likely to be at risk from passive smoking diseases.
is more harmful to non-smokers than to smokers.
is less likely to be at risk of contracting lung cancer.
is more likely to be at risk of contracting various cancers.
opposes smoking and publishes research on the subject.
is just as harmful to smokers as it is to non-smokers.
reduces the quantity of blood flowing around the body.

Questions 25-28
Classify the following statements as being
A
B
C
D

a finding of the UCSF study
an opinion of the UCSF study
a finding of the EPA report
an assumption of consultants to the tobacco industry

Write the appropriate letters A—D in boxes 25—28 on your answer sheet.
NB You may use any letter more than once.
25

Smokers’ cardiovascular systems adapt to the intake of environmental smoke.

26 There is a philosophical question as to whether people should have to inhale others’ smoke.
27

Smoke-free public places offer the best solution.

28 The intake of side-stream smoke is more harmful than smoke exhaled by a smoker.

22

Reading

READING PASSAGE 3
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 29-40 which are based on Reading Passage 3 on the following
pages.

Questions 29-33
Reading Passage 3 has seven paragraphs A-G.
Choose the most suitable headings for paragraphs C-G from the list of headings below.
Write the appropriate numbers i-x in boxes 29-33 on your answer sheet.

List of Headings
The Crick and Watson approach to
research
ii Antidotes to bacterial infection
iii The testing of hypotheses
iv Explaining the inductive method
v Anticipating results before data is
collected
vi How research is done and how it is
reported
vii The role of hypotheses in scientific
research
viii Deducing the consequences of
hypotheses
ix Karl Popper’s claim that the scientific
method is hypothetico-deductive
x The unbiased researcher

i

Example
Paragraph A
29

Paragraph C

30

Paragraph D

31

Paragraph E

32

Paragraph F

33

Paragraph G

Answer
ix

23

Test 1

THE
SCIENTIFIC
METHOD
A ‘Hypotheses,’ said Medawar in 1964,
‘are imaginative and inspirational in
character’; they are ‘adventures of the
mind’. He was arguing in favour of the
position taken by Karl Popper in The
Logic of Scientific Discovery (1972, 3rd
edition) that the nature of scientific
method is hypothetico-deductive and
not, as is generally believed, inductive.
B It is essential that you, as an intending
researcher, understand the difference
between these two interpretations of the
research process so that you do not
become discouraged or begin to suffer
from a feeling of ‘cheating’ or not going
about it the right way.
C The myth of scientific method is that it is
inductive: that the formulation of
scientific theory starts with the basic,
raw evidence of the senses - simple,
unbiased, unprejudiced observation. Out
of these sensory data - commonly
referred to as ‘facts’ — generalisations
will form. The myth is that from a
disorderly array of factual information
an orderly, relevant theory will
somehow emerge. However, the starting
point of induction is an impossible one.
D There is no such thing as an unbiased
observation. Every act of observation
we make is a function of what we have
seen or otherwise experienced in the
past. All scientific work of an
experimental or exploratory nature starts

24

with some expectation about the
outcome. This expectation is a
hypothesis. Hypotheses provide the
initiative and incentive for the inquiry
and influence the method. It is in the
light of an expectation that some
observations are held to be relevant and
some irrelevant, that one methodology
is chosen and others discarded, that
some experiments are conducted and
others are not. Where is, your naive,
pure and objective researcher now?
E Hypotheses arise by guesswork, or by
inspiration, but having been formulated
they can and must be tested rigorously,
using the appropriate methodology. If
the predictions you make as a result of
deducing certain consequences from
your hypothesis are not shown to be
correct then you discard or modify your
hypothesis. If the predictions turn out to
be correct then your hypothesis has been
supported and may be retained until
such time as some further test shows it
not to be correct. Once you have arrived
at your hypothesis, which is a product of
your imagination, you then proceed to a
strictly logical and rigorous process,
based upon deductive argument —
hence the term ‘hypothetico-deductive’.

Reading
F So don’t worry if you have some idea of
what your results will tell you before
you even begin to collect data; there are
no scientists in existence who really wait
until they have all the evidence in front
of them before they try to work out what
it might possibly mean. The closest we
ever get to this situation is when
something happens by accident; but
even then the researcher has to
formulate a hypothesis to be tested
before being sure that, for example, a
mould might prove to be a successful
antidote to bacterial infection.

G The myth of scientific method is not
only that it is inductive (which we have
seen is incorrect) but also that the
hypothetico-deductive method proceeds
in a step-by-step, inevitable fashion. The
hypothetico-deductive method describes
the logical approach to much research
work, but it does not describe the
psychological behaviour that brings it
about. This is much more holistic —
involving guesses, reworkings,
corrections, blind alleys and above all
inspiration, in the deductive as well as
the hypothetic component -than is
immediately apparent from reading the
final thesis or published papers. These
have been, quite properly, organised into
a more serial, logical order so that the
worth of the output may be evaluated
independently of the behavioural
processes by which it was obtained. It is
the difference, for example between the
academic papers with which Crick and
Watson demonstrated the structure of
the DNA molecule and the fascinating
book The Double Helix in which Watson
(1968) described how they did it. From
this point of view, ‘scientific method’
may more usefully be thought of as a
way of writing up research rather than as
a way of carrying it out.

25

Test 1

Questions 34 and 35
In which TWO paragraphs in Reading Passage 3 does the writer give advice directly to the reader?
Write the TWO appropriate letters (A—G) in boxes 34 and 35 on your answer sheet.

Questions 36-39
Do the following statements reflect the opinions of the writer in Reading Passage 3?
In boxes 36-39 on your answer sheet write
YES
if the statement reflects the opinion of the writer
NO
if the statement contradicts the opinion of the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
36 Popper says that the scientific method is hypothetico-deductive.
37

If a prediction based on a hypothesis is fulfilled, then the hypothesis is confirmed as true.

38

Many people carry out research in a mistaken way.

39

The ‘scientific method’ is more a way of describing research than a way of doing it.

Question 40
Choose the appropriate letter A-D and write it in box 40 on your answer sheet.
Which of the following statements best describes the writer’s main purpose in Reading Passage 3?
A
B
C
D

26

to advise Ph.D students not to cheat while carrying out research
to encourage Ph.D students to work by guesswork and inspiration
to explain to Ph.D students the logic which the scientific research paper follows
to help Ph.D students by explaining different conceptions of the research process

Writing

WRITING
WRITING TASK 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on this task.
The charts below show the number of Japanese tourists travelling abroad between 1985 and 1995
and Australia’s share of the Japanese tourist market.
Write a report for a university lecturer describing the information shown below.

You should write at least 150 words.

27

Test 1

WRITING TASK 2
You should spend about 40 minutes on this task.
Present a written argument or case to an educated reader with no specialist knowledge of the
following topic.
Popular events like the football World Cup and other international sporting occasions are essential in
easing international tensions and releasing patriotic emotions in a safe way.
To what extent do you agree or disagree with this opinion?

You should use your own ideas, knowledge and experience and support your arguments with
examples and relevant evidence.
You should write at least 250 words.

28

Speaking

SPEAKING
PART 1
The examiner asks the candidate about him/herself, his/her home, work or studies and other familiar
topics.
EXAMPLE
Family
• Do you have a large family or a small family?
• Can you tell me something about them?
• How much time do you manage to spend with members of your family?
• What sorts of things do you like to do together?
• Did/Do you get on well with your family? [Why?]

PART 2
Describe a teacher who has influenced you in your education.
You should say:
where you met them
what subject they taught
what was special about them
and explain why this person influenced you so much.

You will have to talk about the
topic for 1 to 2 minutes. You
have one minute to think
about what you’re going to
say. You can make some notes
to help you if you wish.

PART 3
Discussion topics:
Developments in education

Example questions:
How has education changed in your country in the last 10 years?
What changes do you foresee in the next 50 years?
A national education system

Example questions:
How do the expectations of today’s school leavers compare with those of the previous
generation?
What role do you think extracurricular activities play in education?
Different styles/methods of teaching and learning

Example questions:
What method of learning works best for you?
How beneficial do you think it is to group students according to their level of ability?

29

Test 2
LISTENING
SECTION 1

Questions 1-10

Questions 1-5
Complete the table below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS OR A NUMBER for each answer.
Programme of Activities for First Day
Time

Place

Event

Example
10.00

1 ......................

Meet the Principal and staff

10.15

Talk by 2.......................

10.45

Talk by 3.......................

4.......................

30

Classroom 5

5.......................test

Listening

Questions 6-10
Label the rooms on the map below.
Choose your answers from the box below and write them next to questions 6-10.

CL
DO
L
MH
S
SAR
SCR
SR

Computer Laboratory
Director’s Office
Library
Main Hall
Storeroom
Self Access Room
Student Common Room
Staff Room

31

Test 2

SECTION 2

Questions 11-20

Questions 11-15
Complete the table below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.

TYPE OF HELP

EXAMPLES

FINANCIAL

• grants
• 11 ........................................
• childcare

12 ........................................
ACADEMIC

• nurseries
• 13 .......................................
• using the library
• individual interests

14 ........................................

32

• 15 ........................................

Listening

Questions 16-20
Complete the notes below.
Write NUMBERS OR NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.

33

Test 2

SECTION 3

Questions 21-30

Questions 21-24
Choose the correct letters A-C.
21 At the start of the tutorial, the tutor emphasises the importance of
A interviews.
B staff selection.
C question techniques.
22 An example of a person who doesn’t ‘fit in’ is someone who
A is over-qualified for the job.
B lacks experience of the tasks set.
C disagrees with the rest of the group.
23

An important part of teamwork is having trust in your
A colleagues’ ability.
B employer’s directions.
C company training.

24 The tutor says that finding out personal information is
A a skill that needs practice.
B avoided by many interviewers.
C already a part of job interviews.

34

Listening

Questions 25-29
Complete the notes below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.

Question 30
Choose the correct letter A—C.

What is the tutor trying to do in the tutorial?
A describe one selection technique
B criticise traditional approaches to interviews
C illustrate how she uses personality questionnaires

35

Test 2

SECTION4

Questions 31-40

Questions 31 and 32
Complete the notes below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER for each answer.

Questions 33 and 34
Label the diagrams.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.
Introduction to Hat-Making

cut into centre and 33....................................the cut

stick flaps to 34.........................................of circle

36

Listening

Questions 35-37
Complete the notes below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.

Questions 38-40
Indicate who made the hats below. Write the appropriate letter A-E next to each name.
38

Theresa........................

39

Muriel........................

40

Fabrice........................

37

Test 2

READING
READING PASSAGE 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13 which are based on Reading Passage 1 below.

A Remarkable Beetle
Some of the most remarkable beetles are the dung beetles,
which spend almost their whole lives eating and breeding
in dung’.
More than 4,000 species of these remarkable creatures
have evolved and adapted to the world’s different climates
and the dung of its many animals. Australia’s native dung
beetles are scrub and woodland dwellers, specialising in
coarse marsupial droppings and avoiding the soft cattle
dung in which bush flies and buffalo flies breed.
In the early 1960s George Bornemissza, then a scientist at
the Australian Government’s premier research
organisation, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO), suggested that dung beetles
should be introduced to Australia to control dung-breeding
flies. Between 1968 and 1982, the CSIRO imported insects
from about 50 different species of dung beetle, from Asia, Europe and Africa, aiming
to match them to different climatic zones in Australia. Of the 26 species that are
known to have become successfully integrated into the local environment, only one,
an African species released in northern Australia, has reached its natural boundary.
Introducing dung beetles into a pasture is a simple process: approximately 1,500
beetles are released, a handful at a time, into fresh cow pats2 in the cow pasture.
The beetles immediately disappear beneath the pats digging and tunnelling and, if
they successfully adapt to their new environment, soon become a permanent, selfsustaining part of the local ecology. In time they multiply and within three or four
years the benefits to the pasture are obvious.
Dung beetles work from the inside of the pat so they are sheltered from predators
such as birds and foxes. Most species burrow into the soil and bury dung in tunnels
directly underneath the pats, which are hollowed out from within. Some large species
originating from France excavate tunnels to a depth of approximately 30 cm below
the dung pat. These beetles make sausage-shaped brood chambers along the tunnels.
The shallowest tunnels belong to a much smaller Spanish species that buries dung in
chambers that hang like fruit from the branches of a pear tree. South African beetles

38

Reading
dig narrow tunnels of approximately 20 cm below the surface of the pat. Some
surface-dwelling beetles, including a South African species, cut perfectly-shaped balls
from the pat, which are rolled away and attached to the bases of plants.
For maximum dung burial in spring, summer and autumn, farmers require a variety of
species with overlapping periods of activity. In the cooler environments of the state
of Victoria, the large French species (2.5 cms long) is matched with smaller (half this
size), temperate-climate Spanish species. The former are slow to recover from the
winter cold and produce only one or two generations of offspring from late spring
until autumn. The latter, which multiply rapidly in early spring, produce two to five
generations annually. The South African ball-rolling species, being a subtropical
beetle, prefers the climate of northern and coastal New South Wales where it
commonly works with the South African tunnelling species. In warmer climates, many
species are active for longer periods of the year.
Dung beetles were initially introduced in the late 1960s with a view to controlling
buffalo flies by removing the dung within a day or two and so preventing flies from
breeding. However, other benefits have become evident. Once the beetle larvae have
finished pupation, the residue is a first-rate source of fertiliser. The tunnels
abandoned by the beetles provide excellent aeration and water channels for root
systems. In addition, when the new generation of beetles has left the nest the
abandoned burrows are an attractive habitat for soil-enriching earthworms. The
digested dung in these burrows is an excellent food supply for the earthworms, which
decompose it further to provide essential soil nutrients. If it were not for the dung
beetle, chemical fertiliser and dung would be washed by rain into streams and rivers
before it could be absorbed into the hard earth, polluting water courses and causing
blooms of blue-green algae. Without the beetles to dispose of the dung, cow pats
would litter pastures making grass inedible to cattle and depriving the soil of sunlight.
Australia’s 30 million cattle each produce 10-12 cow pats a day. This amounts to 1.7
billion tonnes a year, enough to smother about 110,000 sq km of pasture, half the
area of Victoria.
Dung beetles have become an integral part of the successful management of dairy
farms in Australia over the past few decades. A number of species are available from
the CSIRO or through a small number of private breeders, most of whom were
entomologists with the CSIRO’s dung beetle unit who have taken their specialised
knowledge of the insect and opened small businesses in direct competition with their
former employer.
Glossary
1. dung:
the droppings or excreta of animals
2. cow pats: droppings of cows

39

Test 2

Questions 1-5
Do the following statements reflect the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 1?
In boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet write
YES
if the statement reflects the claims of the writer
NO
if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
1

Bush flies are easier to control than buffalo flies.

2
3

Four thousand species of dung beetle were initially brought to Australia by the CSIRO.
Dung beetles were brought to Australia by the CSIRO over a fourteen-year period.

4

At least twenty-six of the introduced species have become established in Australia.

5

The dung beetles cause an immediate improvement to the quality of a cow pasture.

Questions 6-8
Label the tunnels on the diagram below. Choose your labels from the box below the diagram.
Write your answers in boxes 6-8 on your answer sheet.

Dung Beetle Types
French
Spanish
Mediterranean
South African
Australian native South African ball roller

40

Reading

Question 9-13
Complete the table below.
Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS OR A NUMBER from Reading Passage 1 for each
answer.
Write your answers in boxes 9—13 on your answer sheet.

Species

Size

Preferred
climate

French

2.5 cm

cool

Spanish

1.25 cm

9

South African
ball roller

12

Complementary
species

Start of
active period

Number of
generations
per year

Spanish

late spring

1-2

10

11

13

41

Test 2

READING PASSAGE 2
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-28 which are based on Reading Passage 2 on
the following pages.

Questions 14-18
Reading Passage 2 has six sections A-F.
Choose the most suitable headings for sections A-D and F from the list of headings below.
Write the appropriate numbers i-ix in boxes 14-18 on your answer sheet.
List of Headings

The probable effects of the new
international trade agreement
ii The environmental impact of modern
farming
iii Farming and soil erosion
iv The effects of government policy in rich
countries
v
Governments and management of the
environment
vi The effects of government policy in poor
countries
vii Farming and food output
viii The effects of government policy on food
output
ix The new prospects for world trade
i

14

Section A

15

Section B

16

Section C

17

Section D

Example
Paragraph E
18 Section F

42

Answer
vi

Reading
Section A
The role of governments in environmental management is difficult but inescapable.
Sometimes, the state tries to manage the resources it owns, and does so badly. Often,
however, governments act in an even more harmful way. They actually subsidise the
exploitation and consumption of natural resources. A whole range of policies, from farmprice support to protection for coal-mining, do environmental damage and (often) make no
economic sense. Scrapping them offers a two-fold bonus: a cleaner environment and a
more efficient economy. Growth and environmentalism can actually go hand in hand, if
politicians have the courage to confront the vested interest that subsi-dies create.
SectionB
No activity affects more of the earth’s surface than farming. It shapes a third of the planet’s
land area, not counting Antarctica, and the proportion Is rising. World food output per head
has risen by 4 per cent between the 1970s and 1980s mainly as a result of increases in
yields from land already in cultivation, but also because more land has been brought under
the plough. Higher yields have been achieved by increased irrigation, better crop breeding,
and a doubling in the use of pesticides and chemical fertilisers in the 1970s and 1980s.
Section C
All these activities may have damaging environmental impacts. For example, land clearing
for agriculture is the largest single cause of deforestation; chemical fertilisers and
pesticides may contaminate water supplies; more intensive farming and the abandonment
of fallow periods tend to exacerbate soil erosion; and the spread of mono-Culture and use
of high-yielding varieties of crops have been accompanied by the disappearance of old
varieties of food plants which might have provided some insurance against pests or
diseases in future. Soil erosion threatens the productivity of land In both rich and poor
countries. The United States, where the most careful measurements have been done,
discovered in 1982 that about one-fifth of its farmtand as losing topsoil at a rate likely to
diminish the soil’s productivity. The country subse-uently embarked upon a program to
convert 11 per cent of its cropped land to meadow or forest. Topsoil in India and China is
vanishing much faster than in America.
Section D
Government policies have frequently compounded the environmental damage that
farming can cause. In the rich countries, subsidies for growing crops and price supports
for farm output drive up the price of land.The annual value of these subsidies is immense:
about $250 billion, or more than all World Bank lending in the 1980s.To increase the output
of crops per acre, a farmer’s easiest option is to use more of the most readily available
inputs: fertilisers and pesticides. Fertiliser use doubled in Denmark in the period 1960-1985
and increased in The Netherlands by 150 per cent. The quantity of pesticides applied has
risen too; by 69 per cent In 1975-1984 in Denmark, for example, with a rise of 115 per cent
in the frequency of application in the three years from 1981.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s some efforts were made to reduce farm subsidies. The
most dramatic example was that of New Zealand, which scrapped most farm support in
1984. A study of the environmental effects, conducted in 1993, found that the end of fer-

43

Test 2
tiliser subsidies had been followed by a fall in fertiliser use (a fall compounded by the
decline in world commodity prices, which cut farm incomes). The removal of subsidies also
stopped land-clearing and over-stocking, which in the past had been the principal causes of
erosion. Farms began to diversify. The one kind of subsidy whose removal appeared to
have been bad for the environment was the subsidy to manage soil eroslon,
In less enlightened countries, and in the European Union, the trend has been to reduce
rather than eliminate subsidies, and to introduce new payments to encourage farmers to
treat their land In environmentally friendlier ways, or to leave it follow. It may sound strange
but such payments need to be higher than the existing incentives for farmers to grow food
crops. Farmers, however, dislike being paid to do nothing. In several countries they have
become interested in the possibility of using fuel produced from crop residues either as a
replacement for petrol (as ethanol) or as fuel for power stations (as biomass). Such fuels
produce far less carbon dioxide than coal or oil, and absorb carbon dioxide as they
grow.They are therefore less likely to contribute to the greenhouse effect. But they die
rarely competitive with fossil fuels unless subsidised - and growing them does no less
environmental harm than other crops.
Section E
In poor countries, governments aggravate other sorts of damage. Subsidies for pesticides
and artificial fertilisers encourage farmers to use greater quantities than are needed to get
the highest economic crop yield. A study by the International Rice Research Institute Of
pesticide use by farmers in South East Asia found that, with pest-resistant varieties of rice,
even moderate applications of pesticide frequently cost farmers more than they saved.Such
waste puts farmers on a chemical treadmill: bugs and weeds become resis-tant to poisons,
so next year’s poisons must be more lethal. One cost is to human health, Every year some
10,000 people die from pesticide poisoning, almost all of them in the developing countries,
and another 400,000 become seriously ill. As for artificial fertilisers, their use world-wide
increased by 40 per cent per unit of farmed land between the mid 1970s and late 1980s,
mostly in the developing countries. Overuse of fertilisers may cause farmers to stop rotating
crops or leaving their land fallow. That, In turn, may make soil erosion worse.
Section F
A result of the Uruguay Round of world trade negotiations Is likely to be a reduction of 36
per cent In the average levels of farm subsidies paid by the rich countries in 1986-1990.
Some of the world’s food production will move from Western Europe to regions where
subsidies are lower or non-existent, such as the former communist countries and parts of
the developing world. Some environmentalists worry about this outcome. It wiB
undoubtedly mean more pressure to convert natural habitat into farmland. But it will also
have many desirable environmental effects. The intensity of farming in the rich world should
decline, and the use of chemical inputs will diminish. Crops are more likely to be grown p
the environments to which they are naturally suited. And more farmers in poor coun-tries
wilt have the money and the incentive to manage their land in ways that are sustainable in
the long run. That is important. To feed an increasingly hungry world, farmers need every
incentive to use their soil and water effectively and efficiently.

44

Reading

Questions 19-22
Complete the table below using the information in sections B and C of Reading Passage 2.
Choose your answers A-G from the box below the table and write them in boxes 19-22 on your
answer sheet.
Agricultural practice

Environmental damage that may result

• 19

• Deforestation

• 20

• Degraded water supply

• More intensive farming

• 21

• Expansion of monoculture

• 22

A

Abandonment of fallow period

B
C
D
E
F
G

Disappearance of old plant varieties
Increased use of chemical inputs
Increased irrigation
Insurance against pests and diseases
Soil erosion
Clearing land for cultivation

45

Test 2

Questions 23-27
Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 23-27 on your answer sheet.
23

Research completed in 1982 found that in the United States soil erosion
A reduced the productivity of farmland by 20 per cent.
B was almost as severe as in India and China.
C was causing significant damage to 20 per cent of farmland.
D could be reduced by converting cultivated land to meadow or forest.

24

By the mid-1980s, farmers in Denmark
A used 50 per cent less fertiliser than Dutch farmers.
B used twice as much fertiliser as they had in 1960.
C applied fertiliser much more frequently than in 1960.
D more than doubled the amount of pesticide they used in just 3 years.

25 Which one of the following increased in New Zealand after 1984?
A farm incomes
B use of fertiliser
C over-stocking
D farm diversification
26 The writer refers to some rich countries as being ‘less enlightened’ than New Zealand because
A they disapprove of paying farmers for not cultivating the land.
B their new fuel crops are as harmful as the ones they have replaced.
C their policies do not recognise the long-term benefit of ending subsidies.
D they have not encouraged their farmers to follow environmentally friendly practices.
27 The writer believes that the Uruguay Round agreements on trade will
A encourage more sustainable farming practices in the long term.
B do more harm than good to the international environment.
C increase pressure to cultivate land in the rich countries.
D be more beneficial to rich than to poor countries.

Question 28
From the list below choose the most suitable title for Reading Passage 2.
Write the appropriate letter A-E in box 28 on your answer sheet.

A
B
C
D
E

46

Environmental management
Increasing the world’s food supply
Soil erosion
Fertilisers and pesticides - the way forward
Farm subsidies

Reading

READING PASSAGE 3
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 29—40 which are based on Reading Passage 3 below.

Role set
Any individual in any situation occupies a role in relation to
other people. The particular individual with whom one is
concerned in the analysis of any situation is usually given the
name of focal person. He has the focal role and can be regarded
as sitting in the middle of a group of people, with whom he
interacts in some way in that situation. This group of people is
called his role set. For instance, in the family situation, an
individual’s role set might be shown as in Figure 6.

Figure 6

The role set should include all those with whom the individual has more than trivial interactions.
Role definition
The definition of any individual’s role in any situation will be a combination of the role expectations
that the members of the role set have of the focal role. These expectations are often occupationally
denned, sometimes even legally so. The role definitions of lawyers and doctors are fairly clearly
defined both in legal and in cultural terms. The role definitions of, say, a film star or bank manager,
are also fairly clearly defined in cultural terms, too clearly perhaps.
Individuals often find it hard to escape from the role that cultural traditions have defined for them.
Not only with doctors or lawyers is the required role behaviour so constrained that if you are in that
role for long it eventually becomes part of you, part of your personality. Hence, there is some
likelihood that all accountants will be alike or that all blondes are similar - they are forced that way
by the expectations of their role.

47

Test 2
It is often important that you make it clear what your particular role is at a given time. The means of
doing this are called, rather obviously, role signs. The simplest of role signs is a uniform. The
number of stripes on your arm or pips on your shoulder is a very precise role definition which allows
you to do certain very prescribed things in certain situations. Imagine yourself questioning a stranger
on a dark street at midnight without wearing the role signs of a policeman!
In social circumstances, dress has often been used as a role sign to indicate the nature and degree of
formality of any gathering and occasionally the social status of people present. The current trend
towards blurring these role signs in dress is probably democratic, but it also makes some people very
insecure. Without role signs, who is to know who has what role?
Place is another role sign. Managers often behave very differently outside the office and in it, even
to the same person. They use a change of location to indicate a change in role from, say, boss to
friend. Indeed, if you wish to change your roles you must find some outward sign that you are doing
so or you won’t be permitted to change - the subordinate will continue to hear you as his boss no
matter how hard you try to be his friend. In very significant cases of role change, e.g. from a soldier
in the ranks to officer, from bachelor to married man, the change of role has to have a very obvious
sign, hence rituals. It is interesting to observe, for instance, some decline in the emphasis given to
marriage rituals. This could be taken as an indication that there is no longer such a big change in role
from single to married person, and therefore no need for a public change in sign.
In organisations, office signs and furniture are often used as role signs. These and other perquisites
of status are often frowned upon, but they may serve a purpose as a kind of uniform in a democratic
society; roles without signs often lead to confused or differing expectations of the role of the focal
person.
Role ambiguity
Role ambiguity results when there is some uncertainty in the minds, either of the focal person or of
the members of his role set, as to precisely what his role is at any given time. One of the crucial
expectations that shape the role definition is that of the individual, the focal person himself. If his
occupation of the role is unclear, or if it differs from that of the others in the role set, there will be a
degree of role ambiguity. Is this bad? Not necessarily, for the ability to shape one’s own role is one
of the freedoms that many people desire, but the ambiguity may lead to role stress which will be
discussed later on. The virtue of job descriptions is that they lessen this role ambiguity.
Unfortunately, job descriptions are seldom complete role definitions, except at the lower end of the
scale. At middle and higher management levels, they are often a list of formal jobs and duties that
say little about the more subtle and informal expectations of the role. The result is therefore to give
the individual an uncomfortable feeling that there are things left unsaid, i.e. to heighten the sense of
role ambiguity.
Looking at role ambiguity from the other side, from the point of view of the members of the role set,
lack of clarity in the role of the focal person can cause insecurity, lack of confidence, irritation and
even anger among members of his role set. One list of the roles of a manager identified the
following: executive, planner, policy maker, expert, controller of rewards and punishments,
counsellor, friend, teacher. If it is not clear, through role signs of one sort or another, which role is
currently the operational one, the other party may not react in the appropriate way — we may, in
fact, hear quite another message if the focal person speaks to us, for example, as a teacher and we
hear her as an executive.

48

Reading
Questions 29-35
Do the following statements reflect the views of the writer in Reading Passage 3?
In boxes 29-35 on your answer sheet write
YES
NO
NOT GIVEN
29

if the statement reflects the views of the writer
if the statement contradicts the views of the writer
if it is impossible to know what the writer thinks about this

It would be a good idea to specify the role definitions of soldiers more clearly.

30

Accountants may be similar to one another because they have the same type of job.

31

It is probably a good idea to keep dress as a role sign even nowadays.

32

The decline in emphasis on marriage rituals should be reversed.

33

Today furniture operates as a role sign in the same way as dress has always done.

34

It is a good idea to remove role ambiguity.

35

Job descriptions eliminate role ambiguity for managers.

49

Test 2

Questions 36-39
Choose ONE OR TWO WORDS from Reading Passage 3 for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 36-39 on your answer sheet.
36 A new headmaster of a school who enlarges his office and puts in expensive carpeting is using
the office as a ...
37 The graduation ceremony in many universities is an important...
38 The wig which judges wear in UK courts is a ...
39 The parents of students in a school are part of the headmaster’s ...

Question 40
Choose the appropriate letter A-D and write it in box 40 on your answer sheet.
This text is taken from
A
B
C
D

50

a guide for new managers in a company.
a textbook analysis of behaviour in organisations.
a critical study of the importance of role signs in modern society.
a newspaper article about role changes.

Writing

WRITING
WRITING TASK 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on this task.
The chart below shows the amount spent on six consumer goods in four European countries.
Write a report for a university lecturer describing the information shown below.

You should write at least 150 words.

51

Test 2

WRITING TASK 2
You should spend about 40 minutes on this task.
Present a written argument or case to an educated reader with no specialist knowledge of the
following topic.
When a country develops its technology, the traditional skills and ways of life die out. It is pointless
to try and keep them alive.
To what extent do you agree or disagree with this opinion?

You should use your own ideas, knowledge and experience and support your arguments with
examples and relevant evidence.
You should write at least 250 words.

52

Writing

SPEAKING
PART 1
The examiner asks the candidate about him/herself, his/her home, work or studies and other familiar topics.
EXAMPLE
Festivals
• Tell me about the most important festival in your country.
• What special food and activities are connected with this festival? • What do you most enjoy about it?
• Do you think festivals are important for a country? [Why?]

PART 2
Describe a film or a TV programme which has made a strong
impression on you.
You should say:
what kind of film or TV programme it was, e.g. comedy
when you saw the film or TV programme
what the film or TV programme was about
and explain why this film or TV programme made such an
impression on you.

You will have to talk about the topic for
1 to 2 minutes. You have one minute to
think about what you’re going to say.
You can make some notes to help you if
you wish.

PART 3
Discussion topics:
People’s cinema-going habits nowadays
Example questions:
Do you think the cinema has increased or decreased in popularity in recent years?
In your opinion, will this trend continue into the future?
Making a film or TV drama of real/fictional events
Example questions:
What are the advantages and disadvantages of making films of real-life events?
How important do you think it is for a film-maker to remain true to the original story?
Censorship and the freedom of the film-maker/TV producer
Example questions:
Should films and television be censored or should we be free to choose what we see?
How do you think censorship laws will change in the next 20 years?

53

Test 3
LISTENING
SECTION 1

Questions 1-10

Complete the notes below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER for each answer.

54

Listening

SECTION2

Questions 11-20

Questions 11-13
Complete the table below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS OR A NUMBER for each answer.
MEMBERSHIP OF SPORTS CENTRE
Cost

11 £..............................per 12..............................

Where?

13.................................

When?

2 to 6 pm, Monday to Thursday

Bring:

Union card
Photo
Fee

Questions 14-16
Complete the table below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.
Always bring sports 14.................................when you come to 15.................................or use the
Centre’s facilities.
Opening hours

9 am to 10 pm on 16.................................
10 am to 6 pm on Saturdays

50% ‘morning discount’

9 am to 12 noon on weekdays

55

Test 3

Questions 17-20
Look at the map of the Sports Complex below.
Label the buildings on the map of the Sports Complex.
Choose your answers from the box below and write them against Questions 17-20.
Arts Studio
Football Pitch
Tennis Courts
Dance Studio
Fitness Room
Reception
Squash Courts

56

Listening

SECTION 3

Questions 21-30

Complete the form below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR NUMBER for each answer.

57

Test 3

SECTIO N 4

Questions 31-40

Questions 31-33
Complete the table below.
Write NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS for each answer.
"NEW" MEAT

CAN BE COMPARED TO

PROBLEM

kangaroo

31.......................

32.......................

crocodile

chicken

fatty

ostrich

33.......................

Questions 34-36
Complete the table below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.
OSTRICH PRODUCT

USE

Ostrich feathers

• tribal ceremonial dress
• 34.......................
• decorated hats

Ostrich hide

• 35.......................

Ostrich 36.........................

• ‘biltong’

58

Listening

Questions 37-40
Choose the correct letters A-C.
37

Ostrich meat
A has more protein than beef.
B tastes nearly as good as beef.
C is very filling.

38

One problem with ostrich fanning in Britain is
A the climate.
B the cost of transporting birds.
C the price of ostrich eggs.

39

Ostrich chicks reared on farms
A must be kept in incubators until mature.
B are very independent.
C need looking after carefully.

40

The speaker suggests ostrich farms are profitable because
A little initial outlay is required.
B farmed birds are very productive.
C there is a good market for the meat.

59

Test 3

READING
READING PASSAGE 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1—12 which are based on Reading Passage 1 below.

THE DEPARTMENT OF ETHNOGRAPHY
The Department of Ethnography was
created as a separate deportment within
the British Museum in 1946, offer 140
years of gradual development from the
original Department of Antiquities. If is
concerned with the people of Africa, the
Americas, Asio, the Pacific and parrs of
Europe. While this includes complex
kingdoms, as in Africa, and ancient
empires, such as those of the Americas,
the primary focus of attention in the
twentieth century has been on small-scale
societies. Through its collections, the
Department’s specific interest is to
document how objects are created and
used, and to understand their importance
and significance to those who produce
them. Such objects can include both the
extraordinary ond the mundane, the
beautiful and the banal.
The collections of the Department of
Ethnography include approximately
300,000 artefacts, of which about half are
the product of fhe present century. The
Department has o vital role to play in
providing information on non-Western
cultures to visitors ond scholars. To this
end, the collecting emphasis has often
been less on individual objects than on
groups of material which allow the display
of a btoad range of o society’s cultural
expressions.

60

Much of the more recent collecting was
carried out in the field, sometimes by
Museum staff working on general
anthropological projects in collaboration
with a wide variety of national governments
and other institutions. The material
collected includes great technical series for instance, of textiles from Bolivia,
Guatemala, Indonesia and ateas of West
Africa - or of artefact types such as boats.
The latter include working examples of
coracles from India, reed boars from Lake
Titicaca in fhe Andes, kayaks from fhe
Arctic, and dug-out canoes from several
countries. The field assemblages, such as
those from fhe Sudan, Madagascat and
Yemen, include a whole range of material
culture represenrarive of one people. This
might cover the necessities of life of an
African herdsman or on Arabian farmer,
ritual objects, or even on occasion airport
art. Again, a series of acquisitions might

Reading
represent a decade’s fieldwork
documenting social experience as
expressed in the varieties of clothing and
jewellery styles, tents and camel trappings
from various Middle Eastern countries, or in
the developing preferences in personal
adornment and dress from Papua New
Guinea. Particularly interesting are a series
of collections which continue to document
the evolution of ceremony and of material
forms for which the Department already
possesses early (if nor the earliest)
collections formed after the first contact
with Europeans.
The importance of these acquisitions
extends beyond the objects themselves.
They come fo the Museum with
documentation of the social context, ideally
including photographic records. Such
acquisitions have multiple purposes. Most
significantly they document for future
change. Most people think of the cultures
represented in the collection in terms of the
absence of advanced technology. In fact,
traditional practices draw on a continuing
wealth of technological ingenuity. Limited
resources and ecological constraints are
often overcome by personal skills that
would be regarded as exceptional in the
West. Of growing interest is the way in
which much of what we might see as
disposable is, elsewhere, recycled and
reused.

adapt In spire of partial integration into a
notoriously fickle world economy. Since the
seventeenth century, with the advent of
trading companies exporting manufactured
textiles to North America and Asia, the
importation of cheap goods has often
contributed to the destruction of local skills
and indigenous markets. On fhe one hand
modern imported goods may be used in an
everyday setting, while on the other hand
other traditional objects may still be
required for ritually significant events.
Within this context trade and exchange
aftifudes are inverted. What are utilifarian
objects to a Westerner may be prized
objects in other cultures - when
transformed by locol ingenuity - principally
for aesthetic value. In fhe some way, the
West imports goods from other peoples
and in certain circumsronces categotises
them as ‘art’.
Collections act as an ever-expanding
database, nor merely for scholars and
anthropologists, bur for people involved in
a whole range of educational and artistic
purposes. These include schools and
universities as well as colleges of art and
design. The provision of information about
non-Western aesthetics and techniques,
not just for designers and artists but for all
visitors, is a growing responsibility for a
Department whose own context is an
increasingly multicultural European society.

With the Independence of much of Asia
and Africa after 1945, if was assumed that
economic progress would rapidly lead to
the disappearance or assimilation of
many small-scale societies. Therefore, it
was felt that the Museum should acquire
materials representing people whose art or
material culture, ritual or political structures
were on the point of irrevocable change.
This attitude altered with the realisation that
marginal communities can survive and

61

Test 3

Questions 1-6
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?
In boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet write
TRUE
if the statement is true according to the passage
FALSE
if the statement is false according to the passage
NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage
Example
The Department of Ethnography
replaced the Department of Antiquities
at the British Museum.

Answer
FALSE

1

The twentieth-century collections come mainly from mainstream societies such as the US and
Europe.

2

The Department of Ethnography focuses mainly on modern societies.

3

The Department concentrates on collecting single unrelated objects of great value.

4

The textile collection of the Department of Ethnography is the largest in the world.

5

Traditional societies are highly inventive in terms of technology.

6

Many small-scale societies have survived and adapted in spite of predictions to the contrary.

62

Reading

Questions 7-12
Some of the exhibits at the Department of Ethnography are listed below (Questions 7-12).
The writer gives these exhibits as examples of different collection types.
Match each exhibit with the collection type with which it is associated in Reading Passage 1.
Write the appropriate letters in boxes 7-12 on your answer sheet.
NB You may use any collection type more than once.
Collection Types
AT
EC
FA
SE
TS

Artefact Types
Evolution of Ceremony
Field Assemblages
Social Experience
Technical Series

Example
Boats

Answer
AT

7 Bolivian textiles
8 Indian coracles
9 airport art
10 Arctic kayaks
11 necessities of life of an Arabian farmer
12 tents from the Middle East

63

Test 3

READING PASSAGE 2
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 13-25 which are based on Reading Passage 2 on
the following pages.

Questions 13-15
Reading Passage 2 has six sections A-F.
Choose the most suitable headings for sections A, B and D from the list of headings below.
Write the appropriate numbers i-vii in boxes 13-15 on your answer sheet.
List of Headings
i

Amazonia as unable to sustain complex
societies
ii The role of recent technology in ecological
research in Amazonia
iii The hostility of the indigenous population
to North American influences
iv Recent evidence
v Early research among the Indian Amazons
vi The influence of prehistoric inhabitants on
Amazonian natural history
vii The great difficulty of changing local
attitudes and practices
13

Section A

14

Section B

Example
Paragraph C
15 Section D

64

Answer
iv

Reading

A In 1942 Allan R Holmberg, a doctoral student in anthropology from Yale University, USA,
ventured deep into the jungle of Bolivian Amazonia and searched out an isolated band of
Siriono Indians. The Siriono, Holmberg later wrote, led a "strikingly backward" existence.
Their villages were little more than clusters of thatched huts. Life itself was a perpetual and
punishing search for food: some families grew manioc and other starchy crops in small garden
plots cleared from the forest, while other members of the tribe scoured the country for small
game and promising fish holes. When local resources became depleted, the tribe moved on.
As for technology, Holmberg noted, the Siriono "may be classified among the most
handicapped peoples of the world". Other than bows, arrows and crude digging sticks, the
only tools the Siriono seemed to possess were "two machetes worn to the size of pocketknives".
B Although the lives of the Siriono have changed in the intervening decades, the image of them
as Stone Age relics has endured. Indeed, in many respects the Siriono epitomize the popular
conception of life in Amazonia. To casual observers, as well as to influential natural scientists
and regional planners, the luxuriant forests of Amazonia seem ageless, unconquerable, a
habitat totally hostile to human civilization. The apparent simplicity of Indian ways of life has
been judged an evolutionary adaptation to forest ecology, living proof that Amazonia could
not - and cannot - sustain a more complex society. Archaeological traces of far more elaborate
cultures have been dismissed as the ruins of invaders from outside the region, abandoned to
decay in the uncompromising tropical environment.
C The popular conception of Amazonia and its native residents would be enormously
consequential if it were true. But the human history of Amazonia in the past 11,000 years
betrays that view as myth. Evidence gathered in recent years from anthropology and
archaeology indicates that the region has supported a series of indigenous cultures for eleven
thousand years; an extensive network of complex societies - some with populations perhaps as
large as 100,000 - thrived there for more than 1,000 years before the arrival of Europeans.
(Indeed, some contemporary tribes, including the Siriono, still live among the earthworks of
earlier cultures.) Far from being evolutionarily retarded, prehistoric Amazonian people
developed technologies and cultures that were advanced for their time. If the lives of Indians
today seem "primitive", the appearance is not the result of some environmental adaptation or
ecological barrier; rather it is a comparatively recent adaptation to centuries of economic and
political pressure. Investigators who argue otherwise have unwittingly projected the present
onto the past.
D The evidence for a revised view of Amazonia will take many people by surprise. Ecologists
have assumed that tropical ecosystems were shaped entirely by natural forces and they have

65

Test 3
focused their research on habitats they believe have escaped human influence. But as the
University of Florida ecologist, Peter Feinsinger, has noted, an approach that leaves people
out of the equation is no longer tenable. The archaeological evidence shows that the natural
history of Amazonia is to a surprising extent tied to the activities of its prehistoric inhabitants.
E The realization comes none too soon. In June 1992 political and environmental leaders from
across the world met in Rio de Janeiro to discuss how developing countries can advance their
economies without destroying their natural resources. The challenge is especially difficult in
Amazonia. Because the tropical forest has been depicted as ecologically unfit for large-scale
human occupation, some environmentalists have opposed development of any kind.
Ironically, one major casualty of that extreme position has been the environment itself. While
policy makers struggle to define and implement appropriate legislation, development of the
most destructive kind has continued apace over vast areas.
F The other major casualty of the "naturalism" of environmental scientists has been the
indigenous Amazonians, whose habits of hunting, fishing, and slash-and-burn cultivation
often have been represented as harmful to the habitat. In the clash between environmentalists
and developers, the Indians, whose presence is in fact crucial to the survival of the forest,
have suffered the most. The new understanding of the pre-history of Amazonia, however,
points toward a middle ground. Archaeology makes clear that with judicious management
selected parts of the region could support more people than anyone thought before. The longburied past, it seems, offers hope for the future.

66

Reading

Questions 16-21
Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 2?
In boxes 16—21 on your answer sheet write
YES
if the statement agrees with the views of the writer
NO
if the statement contradicts the views of the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
Example
The prehistoric inhabitants of
Amazonia were relatively backward in
technological terms.

Answer
NO

16 The reason for the simplicity of the Indian way of life is that Amazonia has always been unable
to support a more complex society.
17

There is a crucial popular misconception about the human history of Amazonia.

18

There are lessons to be learned from similar ecosystems in other parts of the world.

19 Most ecologists were aware that the areas of Amazonia they were working in had been shaped
by human settlement.
20

The indigenous Amazonian Indians are necessary to the well-being of the forest.

21

It would be possible for certain parts of Amazonia to support a higher population.

67

Test 3

Questions 22-25
Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 22-25 on your answer sheet.
22 In 1942 the US anthropology student concluded that the Siriono
A were unusually aggressive and cruel.
B had had their way of life destroyed by invaders.
C were an extremely primitive society.
D had only recently made permanent settlements.
23 The author believes recent discoveries of the remains of complex societies in Amazonia
A are evidence of early indigenous communities.
B are the remains of settlements by invaders.
C are the ruins of communities established since the European invasions.
D show the region has only relatively recently been covered by forest.
24 The assumption that the tropical ecosystem of Amazonia has been created solely by natural
forces
A has often been questioned by ecologists in the past.
B has been shown to be incorrect by recent research.
C was made by Peter Feinsinger and other ecologists.
D has led to some fruitful discoveries.
25

68

The application of our new insights into the Amazonian past would
A warn us against allowing any development at all.
B cause further suffering to the Indian communities.
C change present policies on development in the region.
D reduce the amount of hunting, fishing, and ‘slash-and-burn’.

Reading

READING PASSAGE 3
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 26-40 which are based on Reading Passage 3 below
.

Hormone levels - and hence our moods -may
be affected by the weather. Gloomy weather
can cause depression, but sunshine appears to
raise the spirits. In Britain, for example, the
dull weather of winter drastically cuts down
the amount of sunlight that is experienced
which strongly affects some people. They
become so depressed and lacking in energy
that their work and social life are affected.
This condition has been given the name SAD
(Seasonal Affective Disorder). Sufferers can
fight back by making the most of any sunlight
in winter and by spending a few hours each
day under special, full-spectrum lamps. These
provide more ultraviolet and blue-green light
than ordinary fluorescent and tungsten lights.
Some Russian scientists claim that children
learn better after being exposed to ultraviolet
light. In warm countries, hours of work are
often arranged so that workers can take a
break, or even a siesta, during the hottest part
of the day. Scientists are working to discover
the links between the weather and human
beings’ moods and performance.
It is generally believed that tempers grow
shorter in hot, muggy weather. There is no

doubt that ‘crimes against the person’ rise in
the summer, when the weather is hotter and
fall in the winter when the weather is colder.
Research in the United States has shown a
relationship between temperature and street
riots. The frequency of riots rises dramatically
as the weather gets warmer, hitting a peak
around 27-30°C. But is this effect really due to
a mood change caused by the heat? Some
scientists argue that trouble starts more often
in hot weather merely because there are more
people in the street when the weather is good.
Psychologists have also studied how being
cold affects performance. Researchers
compared divers working in icy cold water at
5°C with others in water at 20°C (about
swimming pool temperature). The colder
water made the divers worse at simple
arithmetic and other mental tasks. But
significantly, their performance was impaired
as soon as they were put into the cold water before their bodies had time to cool down.
This suggests that the low temperature did
not slow down mental functioning directly,
but the feeling of cold distracted the divers
from their tasks.

69

Test 3
Psychologists have conducted studies
showing that people become less sceptical and
more optimistic when the weather is sunny
However, this apparently does not just
depend on the temperature. An American
psychologist studied customers in a
temperature-controlled restaurant. They gave
bigger tips when the sun was shining and
smaller tips when it wasn’t, even though the
temperature in the restaurant was the same. A
link between weather and mood is made
believable by the evidence for a connection
between behaviour and the length of the
daylight hours. This in turn might involve the
level of a hormone called melatonin,
produced in the pineal gland in the brain. The
amount of melatonin falls with greater
exposure to daylight. Research shows that
melatonin plays an important part in the
seasonal behaviour of certain animals. For
example, food consumption of stags increases
during the winter, reaching a peak in
February/ March. It falls again to a low point
in May, then rises to a peak in September,
before dropping to another minimum in
November. These changes seem to be
triggered by varying melatonin levels.
In the laboratory, hamsters put on more
weight when the nights are getting shorter
and their melatonin levels are falling. On the
other hand, if they are given injections of
melatonin, they will stop eating altogether. It
seems that time cues provided by the
changing lengths of day and night trigger
changes in animals’ behaviour - changes that
are needed to cope with the cycle of the
seasons. People’s moods too, have been
shown to react to the length of the daylight
hours. Sceptics might say that longer exposure
to sunshine puts people in a better mood

70

because they associate it with the happy
feelings of holidays and freedom from
responsibility. However, the belief that rain
and murky weather make people more
unhappy is borne out by a study in Belgium,
which showed that a telephone counselling
service gets more telephone calls from people
with suicidal feelings when it rains.
When there is a thunderstorm brewing, some
people complain of the air being ‘heavy’ and
of feeling irritable, moody and on edge. They
may be reacting to the fact that the air can
become slightly positively charged when large
thunderclouds are generating the intense
electrical fields that cause lightning flashes.
The positive charge increases the levels of
serotonin (a chemical involved in sending
signals in the nervous system). High levels of
serotonin in certain areas of the nervous
system make people more active and reactive
and, possibly, more aggressive. When certain
winds are blowing, such as the Mistral in
southern France and the Fohn in southern
Germany, mood can be affected - and the
number of traffic accidents rises. It may be
significant that the concentration of positively
charged particles is greater than normal in
these winds. In the United Kingdom, 400,000
ionizers are sold every year. These small
machines raise the number of negative ions in
the air in a room. Many people claim they feel
better in negatively charged air.

Reading

Questions 26-28
Choose the appropriate letters A—D and write them in boxes 26—28 on your answer sheet.
26 Why did the divers perform less well in colder conditions?
A
B
C
D
27

The number of daylight hours
A
B
C
D

28

They were less able to concentrate.
Their body temperature fell too quickly.
Their mental functions were immediately affected by the cold.
They were used to swimming pool conditions.
affects the performance of workers in restaurants.
influences animal feeding habits.
makes animals like hamsters more active.
prepares humans for having greater leisure time.

Human irritability may be influenced by
A
B
C
D

how nervous and aggressive people are.
reaction to certain weather phenomena.
the number of ions being generated by machines.
the attitude of people to thunderstorms.

Questions 29-34
Do the following statements agree with the information in Reading Passage 3?
In boxes 29-34 on your answer sheet write
TRUE
if the statement is true according to the passage
FALSE
if the statement is false according to the passage
NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage
29

Seasonal Affective Disorder is disrupting children’s education in Russia.

30

Serotonin is an essential cause of human aggression.

31

Scientific evidence links ‘happy associations with weather’ to human mood.

32

A link between depression and the time of year has been established.

33

Melatonin levels increase at certain times of the year.

34

Positively charged ions can influence eating habits.

71

Test 3

Questions 35-37
According to the text which THREE of the following conditions have been scientifically proved to
have a psychological effect on humans?
Choose THREE letters A—G and write them in boxes 35—37 on your answer sheet.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G

lack of negative ions
rainy weather
food consumption
high serotonin levels
sunny weather
freedom from worry
lack of counselling facilities

Questions 38-40
Complete each of the following statements with the best ending from the box below.
Write the appropriate letters A-G in boxes 38—40 on your answer sheet.
38 It has been established that social tension increases significantly in the United States during ...
39

Research has shown that a hamster’s bodyweight increases according to its exposure to

40 Animals cope with changing weather and food availability because they are influenced by...
A
B
C
D
E
F
G

72

daylight
hot weather
melatonin
moderate temperatures
poor co-ordination
time cues
impaired performance

Writing

WRITING
WRITING TASK 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on this task.
The charts below show the levels of participation in education and science in developing and
industrialised countries in 1980 and 1990.
Write a report for a university lecturer describing the information shown below.

You should write at least 150 words.

73

Test 3

WRITING TASK 2
You should spend about 40 minutes on this task.
Present a written argument or case to an educated reader with no specialist knowledge of the
following topic.
In many countries children are engaged in some kind of paid work. Some people regard this as
completely wrong, while others consider it as valuable work experience, important for learning
and taking responsibility.
What are your opinions on this?

You should use your own ideas, knowledge and experience and support your arguments with
examples and relevant evidence.
You should write at least 250 words.

74

Speaking

SPEAKING
PART 1
The examiner asks the candidate about him/herself, his/her home, work or studies and other familiar
topics.
EXAMPLE
Visitors
•
•
•
•

What would you suggest a visitor should see and do in your country?
Are there any traditional arts or music you would recommend?
Tell me about the kind of foreign visitors or tourists who go to your country.
In what ways has tourism changed your country?

PART 2
Describe a memorable event in your life.
You should say:
when the event took place
where the event took place
what happened exactly
and explain why this event was memorable for you.

You will have to talk about the topic
for 1 to 2 minutes You have one
minute to think about what you’re
going to say. You can make some
notes to help you if you wish.

PART 3
Discussion topics:
The role of ceremony in our lives

Example questions:
How important are ceremonies in our lives?
Do you see the role of private and public ceremonies changing in the future?
Attitudes to marriage in your country

Example questions:
Have attitudes to marriage changed in recent years?
In what ways do men and women feel differently about marriage, in your opinion?
Events of national/global significance

Example questions:
What sort of national events make headlines in your country?
Does the media in your country pay more attention to global or national events?

75

Test 4
LISTENING
SECTION 1

Questions 1-10

Questions 1 and 2

Questions 3-5
Label the map. Choose your answers from the box below. Write the appropriate letters A-E on the
map.

76

A

State Bank

B
C
D
E

St George’s Hospital
Garage
Library
University

Listening

Questions 6-10
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS OR A NUMBER for each answer.
Gift for Susan

Gift for baby

What will they buy?

6.........................................

7........................................

Where will they buy the gifts?

8.........................................

9........................................

Approximate prices?

$15

10 $...................................

77

Test 4

SECTION 2

Questions 11-20

Complete the table below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.
For the recommendation column, write
A

You must buy this.

B

Maybe you should buy this.

C

You should never buy this.
Name

Advantage(s)

Disadvantage(s)

Recommendation

Unbreakable
Vacuum Flask

• Contains no
11..........................
• Steel guaranteed
for 20 years
• Keeps warm for
12..........................

• Expensive
• Leaves 13 ……….
..............

B

Whistle Key
Holder

• Press-button light
useful for finding
keyhole
• 14..........................

• Unpleasant noise
• Doesn’t work
through
15..........................

16 ....................

Army Flashlight
(squeeze light)

• Useful for
17..........................
• Works
18..........................

• Has 19..................

C

Decoy Camera (to
trick burglars)

• Realistic
20..........................

• Difficult to fix
onto wall

A

78

Listening

SEC TIO N 3

Questions 21-30

Questions 21-23
Choose the correct letters A—C.
21

Amina’s project is about a local
A school.
B hospital.
C factory.

22

Dr Bryson particularly liked
A the introduction.
B the first chapter.
C the middle section.

23

Amina was surprised because she
A thought it was bad.
B wrote it quickly.
C found it difficult to do.

Questions 24-26
What suggestions does Dr Bryson make? Complete the table as follows.
Write A
Write B
Write C

if he says KEEP UNCHANGED
if he says REWRITE
if he says REMOVE COMPLETELY

Example
Section headings

Answer
B

Information on housing

24

.................

Interview data

25

.................

Chronology

26

.................

79

Test 4

Questions 27-30
Complete the notes below.
Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER for each answer.

80

Listening

SECTION4

Questions 31-40

Questions 31-34
Write NUMBERS AND/OR NO MORE THAN FOUR WORDS for each answer.
31

Between what times is the road traffic lightest?

32

Who will notice the noise most?

33

Which day of the week has the least traffic?

34

What will be the extra cost of modifying houses?

………………………………………………………………………………………………..
………………………………………………………………………………………………..
………………………………………………………………………………………………..
………………………………………………………………………………………………..

Question 35
Choose the correct letter A-D.
The noise levels at the site can reach
A 45 decibels.
B 55 decibels.
C 67 decibels.
D 70 decibels.

81

Test 4

Questions 36-38
Complete the table showing where devices used in reducing noise could befitted in the houses.

Write: W for walls
D for doors
C for ceilings
Example
acoustic seals

Answer
D

36

double thickness plaster board

37

mechanical ventilation

38

air conditioning

Questions 39 and 40
Choose the correct letters A-D.
39 Which is the correct construction for acoustic double glazing?

82

Listening
40 What is the best layout for the houses?

83

Test 4

READING
READING PASSAGE 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1—13 which are based on Reading Passage 1 below.

Port One
A Air pollution is increasingly becoming the focus of government and citizen concern around the globe.
From Mexico City and New York, to Singapore and Tokyo, new solutions to this old problem are being
proposed, Mailed and implemenred with ever increasing speed. It is feared that unless pollution
reduction measures are able to keep pace with the continued pressures of urban growth, air quality in
many of the world’s major cities will deteriorate beyond reason.
B Acrion is being taken along several fronts: through new legislation, improved enforcement and
innovative technology. In Los Angeles, state regulations are forcing manufacturers to try to sell ever
cleaner cars: their first of the cleanest, titled "Zero Emission Vehicles’, hove to be available soon,
since they are intended to make up 2 per cent of sales in 1997. Local authorities in London are
campaigning to be allowed to enforce anti-pollution lows themselves; at present only rhe police have
the power to do so, but they tend to be busy elsewhere. In Singapore, renting out toad space to users
is the woy of the future.
C When Dritain’s Royal Automobile Club monitored rhe exhausts of 60,000 vehicles, it found that 12 per
cent of them produced more than half the total pollution. Older cars were the worst offenders; though
a sizeable number of quire new cars were also identified as gross polluters, they were simply badly
tuned. California has developed a scheme to get these gross polluters off rhe streets: they offer a flat
$700 for any old, run-down vehicle driven in by its owner. The aim is to remove rhe heaviesr-polluring,
most decrepit vehicles from rhe roads.
D As part of a European Union environmental programme, a London council is resting an infra-red
specrrometer from rhe University of Denver in Colorado. It gauges the pollution from a passing
vehicle - more useful than the annual stationary rest that is the British standard today - by bouncing a
beam through the exhaust and measuring what gets blocked. The councils next step may be to link
the system to a computerised video camera able to read number plates automatically.
E The effort to clean up cars may do little to cut pollution if nothing is done about the tendency to drive
them more. Los Angeles has some of the world’s cleanest cars - far better than those of Europe - but
the total number of miles those cars drive continues to grow. One solution is car-pooling, an

84

Reading
arrangement in which a number of people who share the same destination share the use of one car.
However, the average number of people in o car on the freeway in Los Angeles, which is 1.0, has
been falling steadily. Increasing it would be an effecrive way of reducing emissions as well as easing
congestion. The trouble is, Los Angelenos seem to like being alone in their cars.
F Singapore has for a while had o scheme that forces drivers to buy a badge if they wish to visit a
certain parr of the city. Electronic innovations make possible increasing sophistication: rates can vary
according to road conditions, time of day and so on. Singapore is advancing in this direction, with a
city-wide network of transmittets to collect information and charge drivers as they pass certain points.
Such road-pricing, however, can be conrroversial. When the local government in Cambridge,
England, considered introducing Singaporean techniques, it faced vocal and ultimately successful
opposition.

Part Two
The scope of the problem facing the world’s cities is immense. In 1992, the United Nations
Environmental Programme and the World Healrh Organisation (WHO) concluded that all of a sample
of twenty megacities - places likely to have more than ten million inhabitants in the year 2000 already exceeded the level the WHO deems healthy in at least one major pollutant. Two-thirds of
them exceeded the guidelines for two, seven for three or more.
Of the six pollutants monitored by the WHO - carbon dioxide, nittogen dioxide, ozone, sulphur dioxide,
lead and parriculate matter - it is this last category rhar is attracting the most attention from health
researchers. PM10, a sub-category of particulate matter measuring ten-millionths of a mette across,
has been implicated in thousands of deaths a year in Britain alone. Research being conducred in two
counties of Southern California is reaching similarly disturbing conclusions concerning this littleunderstood pollutant.
A world-wide rise in allergies, particularly asthma, over the past four decades is now said to be linked
with increased air pollution. The lungs and brains of children who grow up in pollured air offer further
evidence of its desttuctive power The old and ill, however, are the most vulnerable to the acute effects
of heavily polluted stagnant air. It con actually hasten death, os it did in December 1991 when a cloud
of exhaust fumes lingered over the city of London for over a week.
The United Nations has estimated that in the year 2000 there will be twenty-four mega-cities and a
further eighty-five cities of more than three million people. The ptessure on public officials,
corporations and urban citizens to reverse established trends in air pollution is likely to grow in
proportion with the growth of cities themselves. Progress is being made. The quesrion, though,
remains rhe same: ‘Will change happen quickly enough?’

85

Test 4

Questions 1-5
Look at the following solutions (Questions 1-5) and locations.
Match each solution with one location.
Write the appropriate locations in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.
NB You may use any location more than once.
SOLUTIONS
1

Manufacturers must sell cleaner cars.

2

Authorities want to have power to enforce anti-pollution laws.

3

Drivers will be charged according to the roads they use.

4

Moving vehicles will be monitored for their exhaust emissions.

5

Commuters are encouraged to share their vehicles with others.
LOCATIONS
Singapore
Tokyo
London
New York
Mexico City
Cambridge
Los Angeles

86

Reading

Questions 6-10
Do the following statements reflect the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 1?
In boxes 6-10 on your answer sheet write
YES
if the statement reflects the claims of the writer
NO
if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
6

According to British research, a mere twelve per cent of vehicles tested produced over fifty per
cent of total pollution produced by the sample group.

7 It is currently possible to measure the pollution coming from individual vehicles whilst they are
moving.
8 Residents of Los Angeles are now tending to reduce the yearly distances they travel by car.
9 Car-pooling has steadily become more popular in Los Angeles in recent years.
10 Charging drivers for entering certain parts of the city has been successfully done in Cambridge,
England.

Questions 11-13
Choose the appropriate letters A—D and write them in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.
11

How many pollutants currently exceed WHO guidelines in all megacities studied?
A one
B two
C three
D seven

12 Which pollutant is currently the subject of urgent research?
A nitrogen dioxide
B ozone
C lead
D particulate matter
13 Which of the following groups of people are the most severely affected by intense air
pollution?
A allergy sufferers
B children
C the old and ill
D asthma sufferers

87

Test 4

READING PASSAGE 2
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-27 which are based on Reading Passage 2 below.

14.
The name is a reference to the
colour scheme that the
Women’s Social and Political
Union (WSPU) created to give
the movement a uniform,
nationwide image. By doing
so, it became one of the first
groups to project a corporate
identity, and it is this advanced
marketing strategy, along with
the other organisational and
commercial achievements of
the WSPU, to which the
exhibition is devoted.

The suffragette movement,
which campaigned for votes
for women in the early
twentieth century, is most
commonly associated with the
Pankhurst family and militant
acts of varying degrees of
violence. The Museum of
London has drawn on its
archive collection to convey a
fresh picture with its
exhibition
The Purple, White and Green:
Suffragettes in London 1906-

88

Formed in 1903 by the
political campaigner Mrs
Emmeline Pankhurst and her
daughters Christabel and
Sylvia, the WSPU began an
educated campaign to put
women’s suffrage on the
political agenda. New Zealand,
Australia and parts of the
United States had already
enfranchised women, and
growing numbers of their
British counterparts wanted
the same opportunity.
With their slogan ‘Deeds not
words’, and the introduction of
the colour scheme, the WSPU
soon brought the movement

the cohesion and focus it had
previously lacked.
Membership grew rapidly as
women deserted the many
other, less directed, groups and
joined it. By 1906 the WSPU
headquarters, called the
Women’s Press Shop, had
been established in Charing
Cross Road and in spite of
limited communications (no
radio or television, and
minimal use of the telephone)
the message had spread around
the country, with members and
branch officers stretching to as
far away as Scotland.
The newspapers produced by
the WSPU, first Votes for
Women and later The
Suffragette, played a vital role
in this communication. Both
were sold throughout the
country and proved an
invaluable way of informing
members of meetings,
marches, fund-raising events
and the latest news and views
on the movement.
Equally importantly for a
rising political group, the
newspaper returned a profit.
This was partly because

Reading
advertising space was bought
in the paper by large
department stores such as
Selfridges, and jewellers such
as Mappin & Webb. These
two, together with other likeminded commercial
enterprises sympathetic to the
cause, had quickly identified a
direct way to reach a huge
market of women, many with
money to spend.
The creation of the colour
scheme provided another
money-making opportunity
which the WSPU was quick to
exploit. The group began to
sell playing cards, board
games, Christmas and greeting
cards, and countless other
goods, all in the purple, white
and green colours. In 1906
such merchandising of a
corporate identity was a new
marketing concept.
But the paper and
merchandising activities alone
did not provide sufficient
funds for the WSPU to meet
organisational costs, so
numerous other fund-raising
activities combined to fill the
coffers of the ‘war chest’. The
most notable of these was the
Woman’s Exhibition, which
took place in 1909 in a
Knightsbridge ice-skating rink,
and in 10 days raised the
equivalent of £250,000 today.
The Museum of London’s
exhibition is largely visual,
with a huge number of items
on show. Against a quiet

background hum of street
sounds, copies of The
Suffragette, campaign banners
and photographs are all on
display, together with one of
Mrs Pankhurst’s shoes and a
number of purple, white and
green trinkets.
Photographs depict vivid
scenes of a suffragette’s life:
WSPU members on a selfproclaimed ‘monster’ march,
wearing their official uniforms
of a white frock decorated
with purple, white and green
accessories; women selling
The Suffragette at street
corners, or chalking up
pavements with details of a
forthcoming meeting.
Windows display postcards
and greeting cards designed by
women artists for the
movement, and the quality of
the artwork indicates the
wealth of resources the WSPU
could call on from its talented
members.

herself under King George V’s
horse at a famous raceAlthough the exhibition
officially charts the years 1906
to 1914, graphic display
boards outlining the bills of
enfranchisement of 1918 and
1928, which gave the adult
female populace of Britain the
vote, show what was achieved.
It demonstrates how advanced
the suffragettes were in their
thinking, in the marketing of
their campaign, and in their
work as shrewd and skilful
image-builders. It also conveys
a sense of the energy and
ability the suffragettes brought
to their fight for freedom and
equality. And it illustrates the
intelligence employed by
women who were at that time
deemed by several politicians
to have ‘brains too small to
know how to vote’.

Visitors can watch a short film
made up of old newsreels and
cinema material which clearly
reveals the political mood of
the day towards the
suffragettes. The programme
begins with a short film
devised by the ‘antis’ - those
opposed to women having the
vote -depicting a suffragette as
a fierce harridan bullying her
poor, abused husband.
Original newsreel footage
shows the suffragette Emily
Wilding Davison throwing

89

Test 4

Questions 14 and 15
Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 14 and 15 on your answer sheet.
14 What is the main aspect of the suffragette movement’s work to which the exhibition at the
Museum of London is devoted?
A the role of the Pankhurst family in the suffrage movement
B the violence of the movement’s political campaign
C the success of the movement’s corporate image
D the movement’s co-operation with suffrage groups overseas
15 Why was the WSPU more successful than other suffrage groups?
A Its leaders were much better educated.
B It received funding from movements abroad.
C It had access to new technology.
D It had a clear purpose and direction.

Question 16
Choose TWO letters A-E and write them in box 16 on your answer sheet.
In which TWO of the following years were laws passed allowing British women to vote?
A
1906
B
1909
C
1914
D
1918
E
1928

Questions 17-19
Complete the notes below.
Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from Reading Passage 2 for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 17-19 on your answer sheet.
Three ways in which the WSPU raised money:
• the newspapers: mainly through selling ... 17...
• merchandising activities: selling a large variety of goods
produced in their ...18...
• additional fund-raising activities: for example, ...19...

90

Reading

Questions 20-26
Do the following statements reflect the situation as described by the writer in Reading Passage 2?
In boxes 20-26 on your answer sheet write
YES
if the statement reflects the situation as described by the writer
NO
if the statement contradicts the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to know what the situation is from the passage
Example
The WSPU was founded in 1906 by
Emmeline Pankhurst

Answer
NO

20

In 1903 women in Australia were still not allowed to vote.

21

The main organs of communication for the WSPU were its two newspapers.

22 The work of the WSPU was mainly confined to London and the south.
23 The WSPU’s newspapers were mainly devoted to society news and gossip.
24 The Woman’s Exhibition in 1909 met with great opposition from Parliament.
25

The Museum of London exhibition includes some of the goods sold by the movement.

26 The opponents of the suffragettes made films opposing the movement.
Question 27
Choose the appropriate letter A-D and write it in box 27 on your answer sheet.
The writer of the article finds the exhibition to be
A misleading.
B exceptional.
C disappointing.
D informative.

91

Test 4

READING PASSAGE 3
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 28-40 which are based on Reading Passage 3
below.

Measuring Organisational Performance
There is clear-cut evidence that, for a period of at least one year, supervision which increases the direct pressure for
productivity can achieve significant increases in production. However, such short-term increases are obtained only at a
substantial and serious cost to the organisation.
To what extent can a manager make an impressive earnings record over a short period of one to three years by exploiting
the company’s investment in the human organisation in his plant or division? To what extent will the quality of his
organisation suffer if he does so? The following is a description of an important study conducted by the Institute for Social
Research designed to answer these questions.
The study covered 500 clerical employees in four parallel divisions. Each division was organised in exactly the same way,
used the same technology, did exactly the same kind of work, and had employees of comparable aptitudes.
Productivity in all four of the divisions depended on the number of clerks involved. The work entailed the processing of
accounts and generating of invoices. Although the volume of work was considerable, the nature of the business was such
that it could only be processed as it came along. Consequently, the only way in which productivity could be increased was
to change the size of the workgroup.
The four divisions were assigned to two experimental programmes on a random basis. Each programme was assigned at
random a division that had been historically high in productivity and a division that had been below average in
productivity. No attempt was made to place a division in the programme that would best fit its habitual methods of
supervision used by the manager, assistant managers, supervisors and assistant supervisors.
The experiment at the clerical level lasted for one year. Beforehand, several months were devoted to planning, and there
was also a training period of approximately six months. Productivity was measured continuously and computed weekly
throughout the year. The attitudes of employees and supervisory staff towards their work were measured just before and
after the period.
Turning now to the heart of the study, in two divisions an attempt was made to change the supervision so that the
decision levels were pushed down and detailed supervision of the workers reduced. More general supervision of the
clerks and their supervisors was introduced. In addition, the managers, assistant managers, supervisors and assistant
supervisors of these two divisions were trained in group methods of leadership, which they endeavoured to use as much
as their skill would permit during the experimental year. For easy reference, the experimental changes in these two
divisions will be labelled the ‘participative programme!
In the other two divisions, by contrast, the programme called for modifying the supervision so as to increase the
closeness of supervision and move the decision levels upwards. This will be labelled the ‘hierarchically controlled
programme’. These changes were accomplished by a further extension of the scientific management approach. For
example, one of the major changes made was to have the jobs timed and to have standard times computed. This showed
that these divisions were overstaffed by about 30%. The general manager then ordered the managers of these two
divisions to cut staff by 25%. This was done by transfers without replacing the persons who left; no one was to be
dismissed.

Results of the Experiment
Changes in Productivity
Figure 1 shows the changes in salary costs per unit of work, which reflect the change in productivity that occurred in the
divisions. As will be observed, the hierarchically controlled programmes increased productivity by about 25%. This was a
result of the direct orders from the general manager to reduce staff by that amount. Direct pressure produced a
substantial increase in production.
A significant increase in productivity of 2O°/o was also achieved in the participative programme, but this was not as great

92

Reading
an increase as in the hierarchically controlled programme. To bring about this improvement, the clerks themselves
participated in the decision to reduce the size of the work group. (They were aware of course that productivity increases
were sought by management in conducting these experiments.) Obviously, deciding to reduce the size of a work group by
eliminating some of its members is probably one of the most difficult decisions for a work group to make. Yet the clerks
made it. In fact, one division in the participative programme increased its productivity by about the same amount as each
of the two divisions in the hierarchically controlled programme. The other participative division, which historically had
been the poorest of all the divisions, did not do so well and increased productivity by only 15%.
Changes in Attitudes
Although both programmes had similar effects on productivity, they had significantly different results in other respects.
The productivity increases in the hierarchically controlled programme were accompanied by shifts in an adverse direction
in such factors as loyalty, attitudes, interest, and involvement in the work. But just the opposite was true in the
participative programme.
For example, Figure 2 shows that when more general supervision and increased participation were provided, the
employees’ feeling of responsibility to see that the work got done increased. Again, when the supervisor was away, they
kept on working. In the hierarchically controlled programme, however, the feeling of responsibility decreased, and when
the supervisor was absent, work tended to stop.
As Figure 3 shows, the employees in the participative programme at the end of the year felt that their manager and
assistant manager were ‘closer to them’ than at the beginning of the year. The opposite was true in the hierarchical
programme. Moreover, as Figure 4 shows, employees in the participative programme felt that their supervisors were more
likely to ‘pull’ for them, or for the company and them, and not be solely interested in the company, while in the
hierarchically controlled programme, the opposite trend occurred.

93

Test 4

94

Reading

Questions 28-30
Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 28-30 on your answer sheet.
28

The experiment was designed to
A establish whether increased productivity should be sought at any cost.
B
show that four divisions could use the same technology.
C perfect a system for processing accounts.
D exploit the human organisation of a company in order to increase profits.

29

The four divisions
A each employed a staff of 500 clerks.
B each had equal levels of productivity.
C had identical patterns of organisation.
D were randomly chosen for the experiment.

30

Before the experiment
A the four divisions were carefully selected to suit a specific programme.
B each division was told to reduce its level of productivity.
C the staff involved spent a number of months preparing for the study.
D the employees were questioned about their feelings towards the study.

Questions 31-36
Complete the summary below. Choose ONE word from Reading Passage 3 for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 31-36 on your answer sheet.
This experiment involved an organisation comprising four divisions, which were divided into two programmes: the
hierarchically controlled programme and the participative programme. For a period of one year a different method
of ... 31 ... was used in each programme. Throughout this time ... 32 ... was calculated on a weekly basis. During
the course of the experiment the following changes were made in an attempt to improve performance.
In the participative programme:
• supervision of all workers was ... 33 ...
• supervisory staff were given training in ... 34 ...
In the hierarchically controlled programme:
• supervision of all workers was increased.
• work groups were found to be ... 35 ... by 30%.
• the work force was ... 36 ... by 25%.

95

Test 4

Questions 37-40
Look at Figures 1, 2, 3 and 4 in Reading Passage 3.
Choose the most appropriate label, A—I, for each Figure from the box below.
Write your answers in boxes 37-40 on your answer sheet.

Employees’ interest in the company
Cost increases for the company
Changes in productivity
Employees’ feelings of responsibility towards
completion of work
E Changes in productivity when supervisor was
absent
Employees’ opinion as to extent of personal
F
support from management
G Employees feel closer to their supervisors
H Employees’ feelings towards increased supervision
Supervisors’ opinion as to closeness of work group
I
A
B
C
D

37

Fig 1...................

38

Fig2...................

39

Fig 3...................

40

Fig 4...................

96

Writing

WRITING
WRITING TASK 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on this task.
The graph below shows the unemployment rates in the US and Japan between March 1993
and March 1999.
Write a report for a university lecturer describing the information shown below.

You should write at least 150 words.

97

Test 4

WRITING TASK 2
You should spend about 40 minutes on this task.
Present a written argument or case to an educated reader with no specialist knowledge of the
following topic.
Improvements in health, education and trade are essential for the development of poorer
nations. However, the governments of richer nations should take more responsibility for
helping the poorer nations in such areas.
To what extent do you agree or disagree with this opinion?

You should use your own ideas, knowledge and experience and support your arguments with
examples and relevant evidence.
You should write at least 250 words.

98

Speaking

SPEAKING
PART 1
The examiner asks the candidate about him/herself, his/her home, work or studies and other familiar
topics.
EXAMPLE
Daily Routine
• What would you like to change in your daily routine?
• Are all your days the same?
• Tell me about your typical weekday and your typical weekend.
• What is the balance of work/study and free time in your normal day?

PART 2
Describe something you own which is very important to you.
You should say:
where you got it from
how long you have had it
what you use it for
and explain why it is so important to you.

You will have to talk about the
topic for 1 to 2 minutes. You have
one minute to think about what
you’re going to say. You can make
some notes to help you if you wish.

PART 3
Discussion topics:
How values can change

Example questions:
What kind of possessions show status in your country?
Do you think it was different for your grandparents?
The consumer society

Example questions:
Modern society is often called ‘materialistic’. Why do you think this is?
Do you think consumerism is a positive or a negative development?
The consumer market

Example questions:
What is the role of advertising?
How do you think the Internet will affect buying patterns in the future?

99

General Training: Reading and Writing
Test A
READING
SECTION 1

Questions 1-13

Questions 1-8
Look at the advertisements opposite.
Write the appropriate letters A-E in boxes 1-8 on your answer sheet.
A

International Language Centre

B
C
D

Global Language Learning Centre
TAFE International
Club Francais
University of Canberra

E

Which advertisement mentions
1

up-to-date teaching systems?

2

that the institution has been established for a significant time?

3

examination classes?

4

that arrangements can be made for activities outside class?

5

the availability of courses for school students?

6

language teaching for special purposes?

Which TWO advertisements mention

100

7

a wide variety of language choices?

8

evening classes?

Reading

101

General Training: Reading and Writing Test A

Questions 9-13
Read the notice about road works below. In boxes 9—13 on your answer sheet write
TRUE
if the statement is true
FALSE
if the statement is false
NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the notice
9

The road will be closed for two days and not re-opened until Monday.

10 The road will be open as far as Little Street.
11

Work on the road will continue each weekend for the next month.

12

Temporary traffic lights will operate at intersections with Main Street.

13

There will be bus services to the university throughout the weekend.

MAIN STREET, GATTON RE-DEVELOPMENT
ROAD WIDENING TO AFFECT WEEKEND TRAFFIC AND BUS
SERVICES TO THE UNIVERSITY CAMPUS
The next stage in the re-development of the roads in the town of Gatton will
mean that Main Street will be closed between Little and Denning Streets
from 6am on Saturday, 12 August to 6pm on Sunday, 13 August. The
intersections of these streets with Main Street will not be affected.
We expect that the work will be completed at this time without further
disruption to traffic.
Motorists should note that Main Street will be closed over the weekend
during the hours indicated.
No university bus services will operate through the area between Little and
Denning Streets. However, alternative services will operate on bus routes
566 and 45 between Gatton Road, the town centre and the university.
The Transport and Roads Department apologises for any inconvenience
caused while improvements are in progress.

102

Reading

SECTION 2

Questions 14-26

Questions 14-19
Read the enrolment details for Ashwood College on the following page and look at the statements
below.
In boxes 14-19 on your answer sheet write
TRUE
if the statement is true
FALSE
if the statement is false
NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage
Example
Overseas students may enroll for a course
at the colledge fron their home country

Answer
TRUE

14 Overseas students must pay a deposit when they apply for a course at the college.
15 Outstanding fees are payable by the end of the first week of the course.
16 Classes are organised according to ability level.
17 There is a break between each lesson.
18

Students may change courses at any time during the term.

19 Any student is permitted to take a week’s holiday during a 12-week course.

103

General Training: Reading and Writing Test A

104

Reading

Questions 20-26
Read the information on the Language Institute on the following page.
Complete the summary of information below.
Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR NUMBERS from the passage for each
answer.
Write your answers in boxes 20-26 on your answer sheet.
SUMMARY
Example
Overseas students who study at ….. may
choose to spend more of their free time

Answer
Totara Language
Institute

with local students by applying for a room in the ...20... . Places are available here even for students
enrolled on the minimum length course of ...21.... Class sizes for each course range from ...22...
students and all the class teachers are well qualified; many of them teach on graduate programmes in
areas such as applied linguistics. As a member of the Language Institute you will automatically be
able to join the ...23... .
Hamilton can offer students a wide range of social activities. The city itself lies on either side of
the ...24... which results in some very ...25... views and enjoyable walks in the gardens.
The Institute employs an activities co-ordinator who can help you organise your free time and you
may also wish to make use of this service for planning your ...26... when you leave New Zealand.
Remember that a student permit is not valid when you have finished your studies.

105

General Training: Reading and Writing Test A

THE TOTARA
LANGUAGE INSTITUTE
NEW ZEALAND
Study English in a national university with students from many
countries.
•
•
•
•

4-week blocks
5 hours’ tuition each day
examination preparation
university entry (with appropriate academic and English requirements)

Choice of accommodation for all students - homestays with local families or in Halls of
Residence with New Zealand students.
The Totara Language Institute is part of the University of Waikato in the city of Hamilton, in New Zealand’s North
Island. Intensive English classes are taught in four-week blocks throughout the year and students may enrol for as
many blocks as they wish. Classes are for 5 hours each day, Monday to Friday, and include preparation for several
international English language examinations. All the courses are taught by highly qualified teachers, many of
whom also teach on Language Institute graduate programmes in second language teaching and applied linguistics.
Classes are small, usually from 10-12 students with a maximum number of 15, and normally contain a mix of
students from a wide range of countries. Students who study English at the Language Institute become
international members of the Waikato Students’ Union. The option is available to move on to university study if
students meet the English language and academic entry levels for their choice of programme. The Language
Institute provides student support, welfare and activities services. Students are met at Auckland airport on arrival
and accommodation is provided with local families or in University Halls of Residence with New Zealand
students.
Hamilton, one of New Zealand’s fastest growing cities, is ideally located for a wide range of leisure and cultural
activities. The Waikato river, the longest river in New Zealand, flows through the centre of the city, providing a
picturesque and park-like setting of riverside walks and gardens. The Waikato region is a diverse agricultural area,
rich in historic sites, arts and crafts, hot springs, native forests, mountains and rivers. Within easy reach is an
unspoilt coastline; the wild and rugged west coast beaches famous for surfing, and the more peaceful east coast
resorts are only a short drive from Hamilton. Further afield the mountains of the central North Island, 3 hours’
drive away, provide superb ski facilities in winter, and hiking country in summer.
The Language Institute activities co-ordinator can assist students to arrange any sport and leisure activities.
Assistance is also available for ongoing travel arrangements for students. Students on a visitor visa or work permit
may study for a maximum of 3 months. Courses of longer duration require a student permit which is issued for the
length of study only.

106

Reading

SECTION 3

Questions 27-40

Read the passage on the following pages.

Question 27

From the list below choose the most suitable title for the whole of the Reading Passage. Write the
appropriate letter A-D in box 27 on your answer sheet.
A
B
C
D

Pollution control in coal mining
The greenhouse effect
The coal industry and the environment
Sustainable population growth

Questions 28-31
The Reading Passage has four sections A-D.
Choose the most suitable heading for each section from the list of headings below. Write the
appropriate numbers i-viii in boxes 28-31 on your answer sheet.

List of Headings
i
ii
iii
iv
v
vi
vii
viii
28

Section A

29

Section B

30

Section C

31

Section D

Global warming
The dangers of the coal industry
Superclean coal
Environment protection measures
Coal as an energy source
Coal and the enhanced greenhouse effect
Research and development
Mining site drainage

107

General Training: Reading and Writing Test A

A Coal is expected to continue to account for almost 27 per cent of the world’s enersy needs. However,
with growins international awareness of pressures on the environment and the need to achieve
sustainable development of enersy resources, the way in which the resource is extracted, transported
and used is critical.
A wide range of pollution control devices and practices is in place at most modern mines and
significant resources are spent on rehabilitating mined land. In addition, major research and
development programmes are being devoted to lifting efficiencies and reducing emissions of
greenhouse gases during coal consumption. Such measures are helping coal to maintain its status as
a major supplier of the world’s energy needs.
B The coal industry has been targeted by its critics as a significant contributor to the greenhouse effect.
However, the greenhouse effect is a natural phenomenon involving the increase in global surface
temperature due to the presence of greenhouse gases - water vapour, carbon dioxide, tropospheric
ozone, methane and nitrous oxide - in the atmosphere. Without the greenhouse effect, the earth’s
average surface temperature would be 33-35 degrees C lower, or -15 degrees C. Life on earth, as we
know it today, would not be possible.
There is concern that this natural phenomenon is being altered by a greater build-up of gases from
human activity, perhaps giving rise to additional warming and changes in the earth’s climate. This
additional build-up and its forecast outcome has been called the enhanced greenhouse effect.
Considerable uncertainty exists, however, about the enhanced greenhouse effect, particularly in
relation to the extent and timing of any future increases in global temperature.
Greenhouse gases arise from a wide range of sources and their increasing concentration is largely
related to the compound effects of increased population, improved living standards and changes in
lifestyle. From a current base of 5 billion, the United Nations predicts that the global population may
stabilise in the twenty-first century between 8 and 14 billion, with more than 90 per cent of the
projected increase taking place in the world’s developing nations. The associated activities to support
that growth, particularly to produce the required energy and food, will cause further increases in
greenhouse gas emissions. The challenge, therefore, is to attain a sustainable balance between
population, economic growth and the environment.
The major greenhouse gas emissions from human activities are carbon dioxide (CO2), methane and
nitrous oxide. Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are the only major contributor to the greenhouse effect that
does not occur naturally, coming from such sources as refrigeration, plastics and manufacture. Coal’s
total contribution to greenhouse gas emissions is thought to be about 18 per cent, with about half of
this coming from electricity generation.
C The world-wide coal industry allocates extensive resources to researching and developing new
technologies and ways of capturing greenhouse gases. Efficiencies are likely to be improved

108

Reading
dramatically, and hence CO2 emissions reduced, through combustion and gasification techniques
which are now at pilot and demonstration stages.
Clean coal is another avenue for improving fuel conversion efficiency. Investigations are under way
into superclean coal (3-5 per cent ash) and ultraclean coal (less than 1 per cent ash). Superclean coal
has the potential to enhance the combustion efficiency of conventional pulverised fuel power plants.
Ultraclean coal will enable coal to be used in advanced power systems such as coal-fired gas turbines
which, when operated in combined cycle, have the potential to achieve much greater efficiencies.
D Defendants of mining point out that, environmentally, coal mining has two important factors in its
favour. It makes only temporary use of the land and produces no toxic chemical wastes. By carefully
pre-planning projects, implementing pollution control measures, monitoring the effects of mining and
rehabilitating mined areas, the coal industry minimises the impact on the neighbouring community, the
immediate environment and long-term land capability.
Dust levels are controlled by spraying roads and stockpiles, and water pollution is controlled by
carefully separating clean water runoff from runoff which contains sediments or salt from mine
workings. The latter is treated and re-used for dust suppression. Noise is controlled by modifying
equipment and by using insulation and sound enclosures around machinery.
Since mining activities represent only a temporary use of the land, extensive rehabilitation measures
are adopted to ensure that land capability after mining meets agreed and appropriate standards
which, in some cases, are superior to the land’s pre-mining condition. Where the mining is
underground, the surface area can be simultaneously used for forests, cattle grazing and crop raising,
or even reservoirs and urban development, with little or no disruption to the existing land use. In all
cases, mining is subject to stringent controls and approvals processes.
In open-cut operations, however, the land is used exclusively for mining but land rehabilitation
measures generally progress with the mine’s development. As core samples are extracted to assess
the quality and quantity of coal at a site, they are also analysed to assess the ability of the soil or
subsoil material to support vegetation. Topsoils are stripped and stockpiled prior to mining for
subsequent dispersal over rehabilitated areas. As mining ceases in one section of the open-cut, the
disturbed area is reshaped. Drainage within and off the site is carefully designed to make the new
land surface as stable as the local environment allows: often dams are built to protect the area from
soil erosion and to serve as permanent sources of water. Based on the soil requirements, the land is
suitably fertilised and revegetated.

109

General Training: Reading and Writing Test A

Questions 32-36
Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 32-36 on your answer sheet.
32 The global increase in greenhouse gases has been attributed to
A industrial pollution in developing countries.
B coal mining and electricity generation.
C reduced rainfall in many parts of the world.
D trends in population and lifestyle.
33

The proportion of all greenhouse gases created by coal is approximately
A 14 per cent.
B
18 per cent.
C 27 per cent.
D 90 per cent.

34 Current research aims to increase the energy-producing efficiency of coal by
A burning it at a lower temperature.
B developing new gasification techniques.
C extracting CO2 from it.
D recycling greenhouse gases.
35

Compared with ordinary coal, new, ‘clean’ coals may generate power
A more cleanly and more efficiently.
B more cleanly but less efficiently.
C more cleanly but at higher cost.
D more cleanly but much more slowly.

36 To control dust at mine sites, mining companies often use
A chemicals which may be toxic.
B topsoil taken from the site before mining.
C fresh water from nearby dams.
D runoff water containing sediments.

110

Reading

Questions 37-40
Do the following statements reflect the opinions of the writer in the Reading Passage?
In boxes 37—40 on your answer sheet write
YES
if the statement reflects the opinion of the writer
NO
if the statement contradicts the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
37 The coal industry should be abandoned in favour of alternative energy sources because of the
environmental damage it causes.
38 The greatest threats to the environment are the gases produced by industries which support the
high standard of living of a growing world population.
39 World population in the twenty-first century will probably exceed 8 billion.
40 CFC emissions have been substantially reduced in recent years.

111

General Training: Reading and Writing Test A

WRITING
WRITING TASK 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on this task.
You are due to start a new job next week but you will not be able to because you have
some problems.
Write a letter to your new employer. In your letter
•
explain your situation
•
describe your problems
• tell him/her when you think you can start.

You should write at least 150 words.
You do NOT need to write your own address. Begin your letter as follows:

Dear...............,

112

Writing

WRITING TASK 2
You should spend about 40 minutes on this task.
You have been asked to write about the following topic.
Some people believe that children’s leisure activities must be educational, otherwise they
are a complete waste of time.
Do you agree or disagree?
Give reasons for your answer and include any relevant examples from your experience.

You should write at least 250 words.

113

General Training: Reading and Writing
Test B
READING
SECTION 1

Questions 1-13

Questions 1-4
Read the information on The Medicine in the passage below.
Do the following statements agree with the information in the passage?
In boxes 1—4 on your answer sheet write
YES
if the statement agrees with the information
NO
if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information about this in the passage
Example
You must shake the bottle before take the
medicine
1

You should lie down after
you have taken the medicine.

2

You must stop taking the
medicine if your eyesight is
affected.

3

You must stop taking the
medicine when you feel
better.

4

This medicine is suitable for a
person of any age.

114

Answer
YES

The Medicine
• This medicine must be taken as directed.
• Before using, shake the bottle.
• Dose: 50ml to be taken twice daily after the midday and
evening meals.
Instructions:
• Do not take this medicine on an empty stomach or
immediately before lying down.
• If any of the following occur, discontinue taking the
medicine and contact your doctor: dizziness, vomiting,
blurred vision.
• This medicine is not available without a prescription and
is not suitable for children under 5 years.
• Once you have begun to take this medicine you must
continue to take it until the bottle is empty, unless advised
otherwise by your doctor.
• Only one course of this medicine should be taken in a
period of six months.
• Expiry date: 16 February, 2004

Reading

Questions 5-9
Look at the notice below.
Using NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER answer the following questions.
Write your answers in boxes 5-9 on your answer sheet.
Example
What has been found in some Fancy Foods
products?

Answer
pieces of metal

5

Where can you find the batch number on the jars?

6

How much will you receive for an opened jar of contaminated Chicken Curry?

7

If you have eaten Chicken Curry from a jar with one of the batch numbers listed, whom should
you contact?

8

What information do they ask you to provide about the jar of Chicken Curry you ate?

9

What is the maximum reward Fancy Foods is offering for information about who contaminated
their product?

IMPORTANT NOTICE: PRODUCT RETURN
Fancy Foods wishes to inform the public that pieces of metal have been found in some jars of Fancy
Foods Chicken Curry (Spicy). The batches of the Jars involved have numbers from J6617 to
J6624.The batch number is printed on the bottom of each jar.
If you have any jars with these batch numbers, please return them (preferably unopened) to the
supermarket where you purchased them. You can also return them to the factory (Fancy Foods
Retailers, Blacktown). Fancy Foods will pay $10 for each jar returned unopened and $5 for each jar
already opened.
No payment will be made for empty jars, which do not need to be returned. However, the company’s
Retailing Manager will be interested to hear from people who have consumed chicken curry from any
of the above batch numbers. In particular, it will be helpful if they can give information about the place
of purchase of the product.
Jars of Fancy Foods Chicken Curry (Coconut) and Fancy Foods Chicken Curry (Mango) have not
been affected and do not need to be returned.

REWARD
Fancy Foods will pay a reward of SI0,000 to $50,000 for information which leads to the conviction of
any person found guilty of placing metal pieces in its products. If you have such information, please
contact the Customer Relations Manager, Fancy Foods Retailers, Blacktown.

115

General Training: Reading and Writing Test B

Questions 10-13
Look at the extract from a brochure on the following page.
From the list of headings below, choose the most suitable headings for Sections C-F.
Write the appropriate numbers i-viii in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.
Example
Section A
10

Answer
vii

Section C

11

Section D

12

Section E

13

Section F

List of Headings
i
ii
iii
iv
v
vi
vii
viii

116

Payment options
Save money by not paying interest
Choosing your style of furniture
Free advice on furnishing your home
Location of stores
Applying for a card
Ordering furniture from home
A wide range of furniture

Reading

Section A
Have you ever wanted to buy a small bedside table? Or a dinner table for 20
people? If you want it, we’ve got it! Fabulous Furniture has Australia’s widest
choice of furniture.
Section B
If you visit a Fabulous Furniture store, you can have your furniture - right now using our Fabulous Furniture Credit Card. When you see something you really
want, you can have it straight away, and pay later.
Section C
Unlike most cards, the Fabulous Furniture Credit Card offers a full 60-day
interest-free period on every Fabulous purchase - no matter when you make
your purchase. This leaves you with more money to spend on other things.
Section D
• You may choose to pay the full amount within 60 days. In this case, you pay
no interest.
• You may spread your payments over a longer period. In this case, interest will
be charged after the initial 60-day interest-free period.
Section E
Application is absolutely free! Nor are there any annual fees or administration
fees. Just fill in the application form and bring it to your nearest Fabulous
Furniture store. Your application will be processed promptly and you can begin
making purchases immediately after your application is approved.
Section F
We have stores in every major city, so you’re never far away from a Fabulous
Furniture store. For our addresses, just check in your local telephone directory.

117

General Training: Reading and Writing Test B

SECTION 2

Questions 14-27

Questions 14-17
Read the notice on the following page about Student Clubs and Societies.
The notice has four main paragraphs A-D.
Choose the most suitable heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.
Write the appropriate numbers i-x in boxes 14-17 on your answer sheet.
List of Headings

i
ii
iii
iv
v
vi
vii
viii
ix
x

English Society
Education Club
Film Appreciation Society
Drama Society
Music Club
Games Society
Women’s Club
Debating Club
United Nations Student Club
Technical Students’ Club

14 Paragraph A
15 Paragraph B
16 Paragraph C
17 Paragraph D

Questions 18 and 19
Using NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS, answer the following questions.
Write your answers in boxes 18 and 19 on your answer sheet.
18

How do you let the CAS President know you are interested in joining a club?

19 How often is the CAS Ball held?

118

Reading

STUDENT CLUBS AND SOCIETIES
Desperate to find friends with common interests?
Urgently in need of student contacts around college?
Looking for different cultural and religious experiences?
Wanting some good discussion?
Don’t look any further!
JOIN A CLUB OR SOCIETY AND HAVE FUN!

A......................................................................
This club was first started by a group of friends who enjoyed going to the cinema. When
our trips became more frequent we realised that there must be others who also shared our
love of movies. This club is for those people. Membership gives wide access to other
activities like basketball and football as well as barbecues and other social functions. We
don’t just enjoy movies.
B......................................................................
The association has many opportunities to debate and we are a non-political unbiased
international organisation which aims to promote international awareness on campus. We
establish links and access to the organisation’s agencies and other internationalist
organisations and their resources. Our plans this year include discussion groups, guest
speakers and to build a model of the UN General Assembly.

C......................................................................
Whether for fun or debating experience, we discuss everything from personal experience,
future society or feminism. This year we plan an internal competition, weekly debates and
beginners’ lessons as well as chances to compete nationally. Whether it be to improve
your verbal or social skills the society provides both!
D......................................................................
Want to be a movie star? Then go somewhere else! On the other hand, want to work really
hard for great rewards? Then come and join the club where interesting theatre is created.
We usually put on three productions each year. So if you like to write, paint, act, direct or
do anything in the theatre, come and put your name down with us.

If you are interested in joining any of these clubs, you can leave a message for the
President at the CAS Office in the Student Union Building.
And don’t forget the CAS Ball is an annual event!
This year it’s being held on 22 December!

119

General Training: Reading and Writing Test B

Questions 20-27
It is possible for some students in Higher Education in Britain to borrow money through a
government scheme. These loans are called ‘student loans’ and are described in the passage on the
following page.
Read the passage and answer Questions 20-2 7 below.
In boxes 20-27 on your answer sheet write
YES
if the answer to the question is ‘yes’
NO
if the answer to the questions is ‘no’
NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage
Example
I’m a full-time student at a local colledge
of Higher Education. I already get a
standard maintenance grant. Does this
mean I’m not eligible for a student loan?

Answer
NO

20 I’m taking a month’s cookery course at a local college. It’s a private catering college. I’m going
a couple of evenings a week, after work. I get a diploma at the end of it. Can I get some help
with a student loan?
21

I’m starting a foundation course in September. It’s full time and after a year I hope to get on to
a degree course. The fees for the actual course are being paid for by my Local Authority. Am I
eligible for a student loan?

22

I finish my first degree in July. I’ve got a place on a Postgraduate Certificate in Education
course to start in September. Will the Local Authority pay the tuition fees for this course?

23

Now all her children are grown up my mother says she’d like to finish the studies she was
forced to give up earlier in life. She’s 48 now and her course is full-time for a year. Is she too
old to get a student loan?

24 I’ve already been given a small scholarship to cover some of my tuition fees. Can I still get a
student loan?
25

I’m actually staying with my aunt while I’m at college. Will the Student Loans Company want
to know how much she earns?

26

I owed the bank rather a lot of money a few years ago. It’s all paid back now but they won’t
lend me any more. Will this disqualify me from getting a student loan?

27 I took a course a couple of years ago, got a student loan, but had to withdraw half-way through.
I’ve kept up all my payments on my loan. Am I eligible for a second loan?

120

Reading

The Government has been funding a loans
scheme for students in Higher Education
since September 1990.
These loans are available as a ‘top up’ to the
standard grant. Although the loan is
intended to supplement the grant for living
costs, eligibility for a student loan is not
restricted to those who receive a
maintenance grant.
The decision whether or not to take the loan
is yours.
Eligibility
You are eligible for a student loan if you are
a UK resident and are attending a full-time
Higher Education course, below
postgraduate level, or a Postgraduate
Certificate in Education course, provided you
start your course before your 50th birthday.
Fulltime courses last at least one academic
year and include sandwich courses which
combine time at college with time spent in a
workplace.
Eligible courses are offered by colleges,
universities, the Scottish grant-aided
colleges and other publicly funded
institutions providing Higher Education
courses.

Your financial circumstances
Students who want loans are not ‘means
tested’ or ‘credit vetted’ - all those eligible
will obtain a loan.
This means that:
• The amount of your maintenance grant or
tuition fees does not matter.
• Other income, if any, is not taken into
account.
• Any previous student loans are not taken
into account.
• The income of your parents, spouse,
partner or other relatives is not taken into
account.
• Your previous financial record is not a
consideration.
When to apply for a loan
If you would like more information on how to
apply for a student loan in readiness for your
entry to Higher Education in Autumn 2003,
then you should contact The Student Loans
Company from June 2003 onwards.
Once in Higher Education, you can apply for
a loan at any time in the academic year.

In general, eligible courses include first
degree courses or their equivalents and any
other courses for which your
Local Authority will pay your tuition fees.

121

General Training: Reading and Writing Test B

SECTION3

Questions 28-40

Look at the passage below.

A

Traditionally uniforms were — and for some industries still are — manufactured to
protect the worker. When they were first designed, it is also likely that all uniforms
made symbolic sense - those for the military, for example, were originally intended to
impress and even terrify the enemy; other uniforms denoted a hierarchy - chefs wore
white because they worked with flour, but the main chef wore a black hat to show he
supervised.

B

The last 30 years, however, have seen an increasing emphasis on their role in projecting
the image of an organisation and in uniting the workforce into a homogeneous unit —
particularly in ‘customer facing" industries, and especially in financial services and
retailing. From uniforms and workwear has emerged ‘corporate clothing’. "The people
you employ are your ambassadors," says Peter Griffin, managing director of a major
retailer in the UK. "What they say, how they look, and how they behave is terribly
important." The result is a new way of looking at corporate workwear. From being a
simple means of identifying who is a member of staff, the uniform is emerging as a
new channel of marketing communication.

C

Truly effective marketing through visual cues such as uniforms is a subtle art, however.
Wittingly or unwittingly, how we look sends all sorts of powerful subliminal messages
to other people. Dark colours give an aura of authority while lighter pastel shades
suggest approachability. Certain dress style creates a sense of conservatism, others a
sense of openness to new ideas. Neatness can suggest efficiency but, if it is overdone, it
can spill over and indicate an obsession with power. "If the company is selling quality,
then it must have quality uniforms. If it is selling style, its uniforms must be stylish. If
it wants to appear innovative, everybody can’t look exactly the same. Subliminally we
see all these things," says Lynn Elvy, a director of image consultants House of Colour.

D

But translating corporate philosophies into the right mix of colour, style, degree of
branding and uniformity can be a fraught process. And it is not always successful.
According to Company Clothing magazine, there are 1000 companies supplying the
workwear and corporate clothing market. Of these, 22 account for 85% of total sales £380 million in 1994.
E

122

A successful uniform needs to balance two key sets of needs. On the one hand, no
uniform will work if staff feel uncomfortable or ugly. Giving the wearers a choice has
become a key element in the way corporate clothing is introduced and managed. On
the other, it is pointless if the look doesn’t express the business’s marketing strategy.
The greatest challenge in this respect is time. When it comes to human perceptions,
first impressions count. Customers will size up the way staff look in just a few seconds,
and that few seconds will colour their attitudes from then on. Those few seconds can be

Reading
so important that big companies are prepared to invest years, and millions of pounds,
getting them right.
F

In addition, some uniform companies also offer rental services. "There will be an
increasing specialisation in the marketplace," predicts Mr Blyth, Customer Services
Manager of a large UK bank. The past two or three years have seen consolidation.
Increasingly, the big suppliers are becoming ‘managing agents’, which means they
offer a total service to put together the whole complex operation of a company’s
corporate clothing package - which includes reliable sourcing, managing the inventory,
budget control and distribution to either central locations or to each staff member
individually. Huge investments have been made in new systems, information
technology and amassing quality assurance accreditations.

G

Corporate clothing does have potential for further growth. Some banks have yet to
introduce a full corporate look; police forces are researching a complete new look for
the 21st century. And many employees now welcome a company wardrobe. A recent
survey of staff found that 90 per cent welcomed having clothing which reflected the
corporate identity.

Questions 28-33
The passage First Impressions Count has seven paragraphs A—G.
Which paragraphs discuss the following points?
Write the appropriate letters A-G in boxes 28-33 on your answer sheet.
Example
the number of companies supplying the
corporate clothing market
28

different types of purchasing agreement

29

the original purposes of uniforms

30

the popularity rating of staff uniforms

31

involving employees in the selection of a uniform

32

the changing significance of company uniforms

33

perceptions of different types of dress

Answer
D

123

General Training: Reading and Writing Test B

Questions 34-40
Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer of the passage?
In boxes 34-40 on your answer sheet write
YES
if the statement agrees with the writer’s views
NO
if the statement contradicts the writer’s views
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
34

Uniforms were more carefully made in the past than they are today.

35

Uniforms make employees feel part of a team.

36

Using uniforms as a marketing tool requires great care.

37

Being too smart could have a negative impact on customers.

38

Most businesses that supply company clothing are successful.

39

Uniforms are best selected by marketing consultants.

40

Clothing companies are planning to offer financial services in the future.

124

Writing

WRITING
WRITING TASK 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on this task.
You are unhappy about a plan to make your local airport bigger and increase the number of
flights. You live near the airport.
Write a letter to your local newspaper. In your letter
•
explain where you live
•
describe the problem
•
give reasons why you do not want this development.

You should write at least 150 words.
You do NOT need to write your own address.
Begin your letter as follows:

Dear Sir/Madam,

125

General Training: Reading and Writing Test B

WRITING TASK 2
You should spend about 40 minutes on this task.
You have been asked to write about the following topic.
It is generally accepted that families are not as close as they used to be.
Give some reasons why this change has happened and suggest how families could be brought
closer together.
Include any relevant examples from your experience.

You should write at least 250 words.

126

TAPESCRIPTS
TEST 1
SECTION 1
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:

Hello ... Flagstone.
Oh hello; is that Flagstone Properties?
Yes that’s right. Flagstone here. How can I help you?
Example
Hello. I’m ringing just to make enquiries about renting a house. My name’s Jon Anderson.
Yes, Mr Anderson. What sort of thing were you looking for?
Two-bedroomed house with garden.
Well. .. yes, sir, that shouldn’t be any problem ... just to let you know that our main areas, the main areas
we deal with, are the city centre itself...
Ql
JON:
City centre ... uh-huh.
JANICE: And the north suburbs.
JON:
Oh well... we were most interested in the Northern areas actually.
JANICE: Right... yes... What sort of price were you thinking of?
JON:
Well... could you give me some idea?
Q2
JANICE: Certainly. It really ranges from £250 per month.
JON:
Only £250?
JANICE: Yes, to about £500 depending on a number of different factors.
JON:
What does it depend on?
JANICE: Well, obviously the quality of the area. And then whether there’s a garden.
Q3
JON:
Well, as I said, we’d want a garden.
JANICE: And a garage pushes up the price.
JON:
Right... well, we wouldn’t necessarily need one. I think about £350 a month
would be our limit.
JANICE: OK. Well.. . would you like to have a look at a couple of properties, sir?
JON:
Yes, that’d be great.
JANICE: Looking at our files ... I think we’ve got two which might suit you ...
JON:
Hang on. I’ll just get a pen. Right.
Q4
JANICE: OK. Well, there’s one on West Park Road which is £325 a month.
JON:
Are the bills included?
JANICE: Well, that one just includes the water bill.
Q5
JON:
OK, right.
JANICE: And the second house is in Tithe Road. I’ll just spell that for you ... OK?
JON :
Yep.
JANICE: T-I-T-H-E Road.
JON:
Got that. And how much is that one?
JANICE: That’s £380.

127

Test 1
JON:
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:
JON:
JANICE:

380. Is that including water?
No, I’m afraid not, but it does include the telephone rental.
Oh well, that’s not too bad then. So,. ..
So, when would you be available to see them?
Well, I’ll be in town next week . . . say . . . Thursday?
No, I’m sorry we don’t have any availability for Thursday. How about Wednesday afternoon?
OK. That’s fine. Would 5.00 be OK?
Yes, fine. 5.00 it is. Just come to the Flagstone Offices.
Oh, before I forget. What sort of things do I need to get done ... to rent with you?
Well, the most important thing is a letter from your bank ...
NO problem . . .
And then a reference letter from your employer.
Yes, that’s OK.
Great, and then we would need you to give 2 weeks’ notice of moving in ...
Right... 2 weeks’ notice. And what about a deposit?
That’s one month’s rent, whatever the amount is.
OK. One month. Is that it?
No, sorry, one more . . . you will have to pay for the contract.
Oh yes. I’d forgotten about that. OK, fine. So I’ll start arranging those, and I’ll . . .
... I’ll see you next week.
Yes. Thanks very much. Bye.
Goodbye.

Q6

Q7

Q8
Q9
Q10

SECTION 2
MRS SMITH:

Hello, Mrs Sutton. Come in. How are you settling in next door? Have all your things from Canada
arrived yet? I thought I saw a removals van outside your house yesterday afternoon.
MRS SUTTON: Yes. They came yesterday. We spent all day yesterday arranging them. It’s beginning to feel a bit
more like home now.
MRS SMITH:
That’s good. Look, come in and sit down. Are you alright? You look a bit worried.
MRS SUTTON: Well, I am a bit. I’m sorry to bother you so early, Mrs Smith, but I wonder if you could help me.
Could you tell me how I can get hold of a doctor? Our daughter, Anna, isn’t very well this morning
and I may have to call somebody out. She keeps being sick and I am beginning to get a
Q11
bit worried. I just don’t know how the health system works here in England. All I know is that it’s
very different from ours back in Canada.
MRS SMITH:
Well, I don’t know really where to start. Let me think. Well, the first thing you have to do is find a
family doctor - sometimes we call them general

128

Tipescripts
practitioners as well - and register with him or her. If you live here, you’ve got to be on a doctor’s
list. If you’re not, things can be a bit difficult. Nobody will come out to you if you’re not
registered. Anyway, they work in things called practices. Sort of small groups of family doctors
all
Q12
working together in the same building. Now what you’ve got to do this
morning is register with one of them.
There are two practices near here, so we’re quite well off for doctors in this part of Manchester.
There’s the Dean End Health Centre about ten minutes’ walk away and there’s another practice in
South Hay. That’s about five minutes away going towards the town centre. We’re registered at the
Dean End one, but they’re both OK. There are about six doctors in
Q13
our practice and four in the other. So ours is quite big in comparison.
QI4
And the building and everything’s a bit more modern. South Hay is a bit old-fashioned but the
Q15
doctors are OK. Their only problem is that they
don’t have a proper appointment system. Sometimes you have to wait for ages there to see
someone.
Anyway, you go to the receptionist in whichever health centre and ask her to register you with a
doctor there. You have to fill in a form, but it doesn’t take long. Ours is called Dr Jones and we’ve
been going to him for years - ever since we moved here fifteen years ago. I wouldn’t say he’s
brilliant but I suppose he’s alright really. We’re used to him now. They say
Q16 he’s very
good with elderly people, but he does tend to get a bit impatient with children. Listen, the one
who’s supposed to be really good with small children is Dr Shaw. I’ve heard lots of people say
that. She’s young and she’s got small children of her own. So you could try registering with her.
And if her list is full, I heard somebody say the other day that there’s a really nice young doctor at
Q17
South Hay, a Dr Williams. He holds special
clinics for people with back trouble. But that’s not really your problem, is it?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------MRS SMITH:

If you want a doctor to visit you at home, you have to ask for a home visit. You’re supposed to do
that before 10.30 in the morning, but obviously, if it’s an emergency, you can phone at any time,
night or day. It might not be your doctor that comes, though. It’s quite often one of the other
doctors in the practice. It doesn’t really seem to make much difference.
Otherwise you make an appointment to see your doctor at the health centre. You usually get seen
the same day. Not always of course, but usually, as I say. They hold surgeries between 9 and 11.30
every weekday,
Q!8
and from 4 to 6.30 Monday to Thursday. Saturdays are only for emergencies.
When the doctor sees you, he gives you a prescription. He writes what medication you need on it
and you take it to a chemist’s shop. There’s one opposite the centre.
If it’s for a child under 16, you don’t have to pay. So if it’s for Anna. there’s no problem. The same
thing goes if you’re unemployed or retired,
Q19
or if you’re pregnant. Just as well because it’s not cheap. You pay the same

129

Test 1
price for each item the doctor has prescribed. At the moment it’s
Q20
something like £5 per item. So you pay for the medication but the consultation with the doctor
doesn’t cost you anything. It’s completely free as long as you’re a resident here. You’re going to be
here for three years, aren’t you? So there shouldn’t be any question of you paying anything to see
the doctor. So that’s one less problem to worry about.
Look, Mrs Sutton. If you want, I’ll sit with your daughter for half an hour if you want to go down to
the health centre to register. It’s no trouble really, don’t worry.
MRS SUTTON: Are you sure you wouldn’t mind? That would really help me a lot. I’ll ask them if they can send
someone round later to see Anna. I think I’ll try the Dean End Centre.
MRS SMITH:
Good idea. Don’t worry about Anna.
MRS SUTTON: Right. I’ll be back as soon as I can.

SECTION 3
TUTOR:
JB:
TUTOR:
JB:
TUTOR:

JB:
TUTOR:
JB:
TUTOR:
JB:
TUTOR:
JB:
TUTOR:
JB:
TUTOR:
JB:

TUTOR:
JB:
TUTOR:

Hello. Jonathan Briggs, isn’t it?
Yes, that’s right.
DO come in and sit down.
Thanks.
Right. Well, Jonathan, as we explained in your letter, in this part of the
interview we like to talk through your application form .. . your experience to date, etc. .. . and then in the
second part you go for a group interview.
Group interview . .. yes, I understand ...
So ... your first degree was in Economics?
Q21
Yes, but I also did Politics as a major strand.
And you graduated in 1989. And I see you have been doing some teaching . ..
Q22
Yes. I worked as a volunteer teacher in West Africa. I was there for almost three
years in total from 1990 to ... umm ... 1992.
Q23
How interesting. What organisation was that with?
Q24
It’s not one of the major ones. It’s called Teach South.
Oh, right. Yes, I have heard of it. It operates in several African countries, doesn’t it? And what kind of
school was it?
A rural co-operative.
Q25
Oh, a rural co-operative, how interesting ... and what did you teach?
A variety of things in different years ... ummm ... I did ... with Forms 1 to 3
Q26
Q27
mainly Geography and some English with Form 5. Then in my final year I took
on some Agricultural Science with the top year . .. that’s Form 6.
Right. Quite a variety then . ..
I also ran the school farm.
How interesting .. .

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------TUTOR:

130

... And how did you find the whole experience?

Tipescripts
JB:
TUTOR:
JB:
TUTOR:
JB:
TUTOR:
JB:
TUTOR:
JB:
TUTOR:
JB:
TUTOR:
JB:

TUTOR:

I’ll be honest with you. At the end of the first year I really wanted to leave and
come home.
Why was that?
Well. .. I was very homesick at first and missed my family ...
Umm ... I can quite understand that.
... and I also found it frustrating to have so few teaching resources, but I did
decide to stay and in the end I extended my tour to a third year.
Right. Things must have looked up then?
Yes. We set up a very successful project breeding cattle to sell locally.
Really?
And then after a lot of hard work we finally got funds for new farm buildings.
And you wanted to see things through?
Uh-huh.
And is that why you want to train to teach Geography?
Yes. I’ve had a couple of jobs since then but I now realise I like teaching best.
And I chose Geography because . .. because it is my favourite subject... and
also because I think it has so many useful applications.
Well. .. you certainly have had some interesting work experience. I’ll ask you
now to go on to the next stage of ...

Q28

Q29
Q30

SECTION 4
ANNOUNCER:

Today’s Health Counsel is presented by Paula Clayburg, who is the chief Counsellor at
Liverpool’s famous pain clinic: The Wilton Clinic. Paula ...
PAULA CLAYBURG: DO you know what Prince Charles, Seve Ballesteros and Elizabeth
Taylor have in common? They all suffer from chronic back pain. In fact,
bad backs are one of the most common health problems today,
affecting people in all walks of life. The most recent available figures
Q31
show that about a quarter of a million people are incapacitated with
back pain every day.
And many sufferers don’t know the cause or the solution to their problem.
The majority of our patients at the clinic tend to be women. They are especially vulnerable
because of pregnancy but also because of osteoporosis, which I personally believe to be the major
cause of problems for women. I have many women patients who say they have
Q32
completely given up exercise because the pain makes them so miserable. But of course that starts
up a vicious circle. Bed rest, giving up exercise and pain killers are traditional responses to back
pain but, although there are many excellent drugs on the market, at our clinic we are beginning to
realise the unique benefits of relaxation therapy. Other
Q33
specialists in the field make a strong case for certain types of exercise, but in our experience they
are easily mishandled and can lead to more harm than good.

131

Test 1
Now, let’s look at some of the reasons why back pain is developing into such a unique menace.
In general, the body is pretty good at self-repair. A strain or a blow to a limb, though painful at
the time, generally resolves itself. But the body’s response to back injury can be very counterQ34
productive. When pain strikes, we attempt to keep the
back as immobile as possible, which makes the muscles tense up. Research shows that they often
go into spasm, which causes further twisting of the spine. A vicious circle is underway.
The second mistake we often make when stricken with extreme back pain is to go to bed and stay
there. Although at the clinic we recognise that a short rest in bed can be helpful ... up to two days
. . . any longer
Q35
makes our back muscles become weaker and unable to hold up our spine. The pain therefore
becomes worse.
Q36
Another problem is being overweight. Anyone a stone or more overweight who already has back pain is not doing himself any favours: though it won’t actually set it
off in the first place, the weight will increase the strain and make things worse. The British diet
could be partially to blame for the increase in back pain: over the last ten years the average
weight of men has risen by 11 lbs and of women by 9 lbs. So much for the causes and
aggravations of pain. But what can WE do to help?
There are many ways in which simple day-to-day care can make all the difference. The first point
to watch of course is weight. If you are overweight, a diet will make all the difference.
Also, studies have shown that just one hour sitting in a slouched position can strain ligaments in
the back which can take months to heal. At the clinic we have come to the conclusion that the
major cause of the problem is not with the design of chairs, as some have suggested, but in the
Q37
way WE sit in them. It can be useful to get special orthopaedic
chairs, but remember the most important improvement should be in OUR posture.
Another enemy of your back is, of course, your beds. If your bed doesn’t give enough support,
back muscles and ligaments work all night trying to correct spinal alignment, so you wake up
with a tired aching back. Try out an orthopaedic mattress or a spring slatted bed. Research shows
that both can be beneficial for certain types of back pain.
Another hazard for your back are the shock waves which travel up your spine when you walk,
known as heel strike. A real find for our patients has been the shock-absorbing shoe insert. A
cheap but very
Q38
effective solution. And you might be better off avoiding shoes with heels higher than YA inches.
Though absolutely flat shoes can be a solution for some, others find their posture suffers.
Q39
Finally a word about the state-of-the-art relief - the TENS machine -a small battery-powered
gadget which delivers subliminal electrical pulses to the skin. Our experience indicates that your
money is better
Q40
spent on the more old-fashioned remedies.

132

Tipescripts

TEST 2
SECTION 1
RECEPTIONIST:

STUDENT:
RECEPTIONIST:
STUDENT:
RECEPTIONIST:

STUDENT:
RECEPTIONIST:
STUDENT:
RECEPTIONIST:
STUDENT:
RECEPTIONIST:
STUDENT:
RECEPTIONIST:

STUDENT:
RECEPTIONIST:
STUDENT:
RECEPTIONIST:

Sorry to keep you waiting. Well, firstly, let me give you this booklet. It tells you a bit more about
the school, the courses and the social activities we offer. Now, on the first page, there’s an outline
of this morning’s activities. There, you see? The programme starts at 10 o’clock.
Example
Try not to be late as it’s a very full day.
At 10 o’clock, all the new students will gather in the Main Hall to
Ql
meet the Principal and the rest of the staff. In fact, you spend most of the morning in the Main
Hall.
Where’s that?
I’ll show you in a minute. Just let me quickly run through this morning’s events first and then I’ll
explain how to get there.
Yes, OK.
Right. Where were we? Yes, so, the Principal’s talk will last about fifteen
Q2
minutes and then the Director of Studies will talk to you for half an
hour about the courses and the different requirements for each. After
Q3
that, the Student Adviser will tell you about the various services and activities we offer to
students. Any questions?
SO, all of this is in the Main Hall?
That’s right. And then you’ll go next door to Classroom 5 at 11 o’clock.
Q4
What happens there?
You’ll have a test.
Test? I don’t like the sound of that. What sort of test?
Q5
Oh, it’s nothing to worry about. It’s just a placement test to help us find
your level of English so that we can put you in the right class. It won’t last long.
But how do I find the Main Hall?
Right; if you look on the back of the booklet I gave you, you’ll see a map of the school. Let me
show you. Look: you came in through the Main Entrance, here, and now we’re here at Reception.
Now, to get to the Main Hall, you walk on to the end of this corridor in front of you and then you
turn left. Walk along past the Language Laboratory and then past the Library, which is next to the
Language Lab, on the same side, and facing you is the Main Hall, at the end of the corridor. You
can’t miss it.
Q6
Q7
SO it’s next to the Library, in fact.
Yes, that’s right.
I should be able to find that. And do you have a Computer Laboratory?
Yes, we do.

133

Test 2
STUDENT:
RECEPTIONIST:

Could you tell me where that is?
Certainly, yes. You go down to the end of this corridor again but, this
time, don’t turn left; turn right, away from the Main Hall. The
Computer Lab. is immediately on your right. OK?
STUDENT:
And where’s the staff room, in case I need to find a teacher at some
stage?
RECEPTIONIST: The staff room is near the main entrance, on the left over there, just
opposite the Reception desk. In a day or two, I’m sure you’ll find your
way around very easily.
STUDENT:
Oh, one last thing. Is there a student common room?
RECEPTIONIST: Oh yes, I forgot to mention that. It’s this area here, very close to where
we are now, to the right of the Reception desk as you come in the main
entrance. There’s tea and coffee facilities there.
STUDENT:
Great. Thank you very much.
RECEPTIONIST: You’re welcome.

Q8

Q9

Q10

SECTION 2
Hello, everybody and welcome to this informal meeting about the University Helpline. The Helpline was set up ten
years ago by the Students Union and it aims to provide new students to the university with a service that they can
use if they need information about practical areas of student life that they are unfamiliar with.
Let me give you some examples of the type of help we can offer. We can provide information on financial
matters; for example, you may feel that your grant is insufficient to see you through college life or you may have
Ql1
some queries regarding the fees you are
paying if you are an overseas student. In both cases, the Helpline would be able to go through things with you and
see what the outcome might be. Another area we can help
Q12
with is what we generally term the ‘domestic’ area; things such as childcare and the availability of nursery
provision, for example, come under this. Then there’s ‘academic’ issues that may arise while you are in the early
stages of your course that you may not know what to do about. You may wish to know more about essay
deadlines, for example,
Q13
or how to use the library - there are all kinds of questions you will find yourself asking and not knowing where to
get quick answers from. The Helpline would be able to provide these. The last example I’ve given here is simply
termed ‘social’ - and yes, there is a lot of
Q14
social life here! But you may have a particular interest you wish to pursue or you may wish
Q15
to participate in outings or trips if you don’t know many people at the moment.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Let me give you some details so that you know where to go and who to see if you want to pay us a visit.
Generally you will see our Helpline officer Jackie Kouachi, that’s K-O-U-AC-H-I. Jackie is a full-time employee of the Student Union and she works in the Student
Welfare Office - that’s the office that deals with all matters related to student welfare and
it’s located at 13 Marshall Road. I have some maps here for those of you who haven’t been
there yet. If you wish to ring the office, the number is 326 99 40. That’s 3269940. The
office is open between 9.30 and 6.00 on weekdays and from 10 to 4 on Saturdays and

134

Q16

Ql 7
Q18

Tipescripts
there’ll be somebody there - usually Jackie or myself - between those times. If you want to
make an appointment you can phone or call at the office in person. Please note that it may
not be possible for anyone to see you straight away - particularly if it is a busy time lunch time for example - and you may have to go on the waiting list and then come back
later.
Well, enough from me. Any questions?

Q19
Q20

SECTION 3
TUTOR:

Good morning. So, we’ve looked at various aspects of staff selection this term
and I think by now you should all be beginning to see how much more there is to
it than just putting applicants through a short interview or asking the ‘right’
questions. So I think you should be ready for today’s tutorial on ‘matching the
person to the job’.
We’re going to talk today about the importance of choosing that all round
‘right’ person.

Q21

MURIEL: Right. So we have to put ourselves into the role of the manager or supervisor?
TUTOR:

Yes. And then we’re going to imagine how different applicants would fit into the
team or group they have to work with ... er ... we’ll look at some examples later.
MURIEL: It’s just theoretical at the moment...
TUTOR:

Yes. The point is, you can select someone - even a friend - who has all the right
qualifications ... degrees ... certificates, whatever. You can also check that they
have a lot of experience .. . that they’ve done the sort of tasks that you want them
to do in your office already, in a similar environment. But if they start work and
you realise that they just don’t get along with everybody else, that... say, they’ve
got sharply contrasting views on how something will work . .. well, with the best
will in the world, you may be backing a loser.

DAVE:

Wouldn’t it be just a question of company training, though?

TUTOR:

Not always. Particularly in a team situation, and I think it’s important to think in
terms of that type of working environment. People have to have faith in each
other’s ability to carry out the task their boss has set them. They have to trust that
everyone will do their part of the job, and you can’t necessarily train people for
this.
But it’s like trying to find out what someone’s personality is like in a job
interview ... I mean you just can’t do that. Even if you try, you won’t find out
what they’re really like until they actually start work.

DAVE:

TUTOR:

DAVE:
TUTOR:

Well, in most interviews you usually ask candidates questions about their hobbies
and what they like doing in their spare time ... that sort of thing ... so employers
are already involved in the practice of ... well, doing part of the task.
But it doesn’t tell you anything. It doesn’t tell you if they’re easy-going or hate
smokers or whatever.
Well, arguably it does give you a bit of information about an applicant’s
character.

Q22

Q23

Q24

135

Test 2
TUTOR:

MURIEL:

TUTOR:

Well, arguably it does give you a bit of information about an applicant’s
character, but also . .. more and more employers around the world are making
use of what are called ‘personality questionnaires’ to help them select new staff
and . . .
What’s it called?
A Personality Questionnaire. They have to be filled out by the candidates some
time during the selection procedure, often just before an interview. The idea is
actually quite old. Apparently they were used by the ancient Chinese for picking
out clerks and civil servants, and then later they were used by the military to put
people in appropriate areas of work. They’ve gained a lot of ground since then
and there are about 80,000 different tests available now and almost two thirds of
the large employers use them.

MURIEL:

Which makes you think that there must be something in them.

TUTOR:

MURIEL:

That’s right. They ask the sort of questions that you might expect, like do you
like working under pressure or are you good at keeping deadlines.
And what if people can see through them and just write what they think the
employer wants to see?
Well that’s always a possibility.

DAVE:

I mean, it’s human nature to lie, isn’t it?

TUTOR:

Well, that’s the point. Apparently it isn’t. These tests are compiled by experts
and they believe that the answers can provide a few simple indicators as to
roughly the type of person that you are .. . that people will generally be truthful
in that situation.

DAVE:

Q25
Q26
Q27
Q28

Q29

MURIEL:

And then you can go some way towards finding out whether someone’s say,
forward-looking ... a go-ahead type of person ... or resistant to change.
TUTOR: Yes. And there are all kinds of (fade out)

SECTION 4
TUTOR:

VIVIEN:

136

Right. Are we all here? OK. As you know, today Vivien is going to do a
presentation on the hat-making project she did with her class during her last
teaching practice. So, over to you, Vivien.
Thanks. Um . . . Mr Yardley has asked me to describe to you the project I did as a
student teacher at a secondary school in London. I was at this school for six
weeks and I taught a variety of subjects to a class of fourteen-year-old pupils. The
project I chose to do was a hat-making project and T think this project could
easily be adapted to suit any age. So, to explain the project.. . After we’d done the
research, we went back to the classroom to make two basic hat shapes using rolls
of old wallpaper. We each made, first of all, a conical hat by ... er ... if I show you
now . . . cutting out a circle and then making one cut up to the centre and then ...
er ... overlapping the cut like this this ... a conical hat that sits on your head. The
other hat we made was a little more complicated ... er ... first of all we cut out a
circle again . . . like this . . . then you need a long piece with flaps on it - I’ve
already made that bit which I

Example

Q31
Q32

Q33

Tipescripts
have here - you bend the flaps over and stick them . .. with glue or prittstick . . .
to the underside of the circle . .. like this. Again, I’ve prepared this so that I don’t
get glue everywhere. The pupils do, of course, so you need plenty of covers for
the table. And there you have a pillbox hat as in pill and box. Now variations and
combinations of these two hat shapes formed the basis of the pupils’ final
designs.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------The next stage of the project was the design phase and this involved, first of all,
using their pages of research to draw a design of their hat on paper. That’s the
easy part. They then had to translate their two-dimensional design into a form to
fit their head. I encouraged them to make a small-scale, three-dimensional hat
first so that they could experiment with how to achieve the form they required
and I imposed certain constraints on them to keep things simple. For example,
they had to use paper not card. Paper is more pliable and easier to handle. They
also had to limit their colours to white, grey or brown shades of paper which
reflected the colours of the buildings they were using as a model for their hats
and they had to make sure their glue didn’t show! Well, it was very enjoyable
and just to give you an idea of what they produced, I’ve brought along three hats
to show you. This one here is based on a circular stairway in an old building in
London. It uses three pillbox hats one on top of the other. This was designed by
Theresa. Here’s another one that has a simple strip going round the base of the
hat but has then gone on to add strips of paper that come out from the base and
that meet at the top of the hat -rather like a crown - making a fairly tall hat. This
was made by Muriel. And lastly there’s a combination of the pillbox or single
strip around the base and then the conical hat shape on top to form a castle
turret. This was made by Fabrice, and there are many more that I could have
brought.
TUTOR: Thank you, Vivien. That was most interesting. Now what we can learn from this
is that.. .

Q34

Q35
Q36

Q37

Q38
Q39
Q40

137

Tapescripts

TEST 3
SECTION 1
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:

Right... let s try and get it sorted out today so we don t have it hanging over us. OK?
Good idea. I’ll take notes.
First thing .. . numbers... have we got anything definite?
Well.. . I’ve been working it out and I think 40 to 43.
Shall we put 45 to be on the safe side?
Yep, fine.
Dates ... well. That’s straightforward.
The last working day before Christmas ... which is...
. .. which is December the 21st.
.. . which is going to be pretty difficult to book at Christmas so we’d better think of
two or three places just to be on the safe side.
Well, last year’s was hopeless.
The Red Lion, wasn’t it?
Yep. We ought to go for something more expensive, cos you . ..
. .. you gets what you pay for.
That new Indian restaurant in Wetherfield is supposed to be excellent... the Rajdoot.
How do you spell that?
R-A-J-D-O-O-T.
But it’s bound to be packed.
Well, let’s put that down as the first choice and have some back-ups. What about the
Park View Hotel as a second choice?
Yes, that’s always reliable. Park View Hotel. ..
And the London Arms in case.
London Arms . ..
I’ll call them now if you want.
No. I’ll do it, Joan. You’re really busy. Have you got the numbers?
Not for the Rajdoot, but... right... Park View Hotel: 777192 and ... London Arms:
208657.
Great. Before I ring, we’d better just make sure they’re within the price range.
Up to £15 a head?
I think you’ll find some people won’t be able to go that high.
Well, you can’t get anything decent under £10.
OK. We’ll say £12?
OK.
And we’d better make sure there’s good vegetarian food.
And a non-smoking section! You know what the boss is like.
Don’t remind me. I’ll let you know as soon as I get anything.

Example

Qi

Q2
Q3

Q4

Q5

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

138

Test 3
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:

JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:
PETER:
JOAN:

Good news. 1 found Rajdoot’s number straight away and they can fit us in. Their
Christmas menu sounds great.
What is it?
French onion soup or fruit juice.
Uh-huh.
Roast dinner or lentil curry .. . sounds ordinary but my friend said it was really
tasty.
Umm ... lentil curry ... that’s unusual.
Then for dessert there’s traditional plum pudding or apple pie, plus coffee.
That sounds really good for £12. Did you book it?
Well, I said I’d check with the staff first. But they did say they’d hold the booking
until next Wednesday anyway. Oh, and if we go ahead, they’d like a £50 deposit.
50 is normal. .. that’s fine.
And they want a letter.
Right... to confirm.
And they say with such large numbers we have to choose the menu in advance.
That won’t be a problem. I’ll put up a notice with details of the restaurant and the
menu. When did you say they wanted confirmation by?
It was .. . let’s see . .. the 4th of November.
Where do you think I should put up the notice? Where everyone’s guaranteed to
see it.
On the cafe noticeboard I should think.
Hardly anyone looks at that.
Well, the Newsletter is probably your best bet.
Good idea. I’ll go and do that now.

Q6

Q7

Q8
Q9

Q10

SECTION 2
TUTOR:

.. . So, I’ll hand over now to Julie Brooks.

JULIE
BROOKS:

Thank you. Welcome to the Sports Centre. It’s good to see that there are
so many people wanting to find out about our sports facilities. First of all,
membership. All students at the college are entitled to become members of
the Sports Centre, for an annual fee of £9.50. To register with us and get
your membership card, you need to come to reception, between 2 and 6
pm, Monday to Thursday. I’m afraid we can’t register new members on
Friday, so it’s Monday to Thursday, 2 to 6, at reception. Now, there are
three things that you must remember to bring with you when you come to
register; they are: your Union card, a recent passport-sized photograph of
yourself, and the fee. It doesn’t matter whether you bring cash or a
cheque. We can’t issue your card unless you bring all three; so, don’t
forget: your Union card, passport photo and fee. Then once you have got
your sports card, you will need to bring it with you whenever you come to
book or use any Sports Centre facilities.

Q11/Q12
Q13

Q14/Q15

139

Tapescripts
Booking over the phone is not allowed, so you have to come here in
person, with your card, when you want to book. Our opening hours seem
to get longer every year. We are now open from 9am to 10pm on
weekdays and from 10am to 6pm on Saturdays. For those of you who are
up and about early in the morning, we are introducing a 50 per cent
‘morning discount’ this year. This is because the facilities tended to be
under-used in the mornings last year. It means that all the sessions will be
half-price between 9am and 12 noon on weekdays.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------So, what exactly are the facilities? What sports can you play here? Well,
this room we are in at the moment is called the Main Hall, and it’s used
mainly for team sports such as football, volleyball and basketball, but also
for badminton and aerobics. On the other side of the reception area there is
the dance studio; this provides a smaller, more intimate space, which we
use for ballet, modern dance and martial arts - not at the same time, of
course. Then in a separate building, which you may have noticed on your
way here . . . it’s on the other side of the car park . . . there are the squash
courts (six of them), and at the far end of the building a fitness room. This
is our newest facility, only completed in the Spring, but it is already
proving to be one of the most popular. As well as all these facilities
available here on the campus, we also have an arrangement with the local
tennis club, which is only two miles away, entitling our students to use
their courts on weekday mornings in the Summer. So, I think that there
should be something here for everybody, and I hope to see all of you at the
Centre, making use of the facilities. If, in the course of the year, you have
any suggestions as to how the service we provide might be improved or its
appeal widened, I’ll be interested to hear from you.

Q16

Q17/Q18

Q19/Q20

SECTION 3
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
IOHN BROWN:

MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:

140

Good morning, Mrs Collins. I just wondered if you could help me with
this entry form for the Young Electronic Engineer competition.
Hello, John. Oh you’ve made the jigsaw for blind children, with the
bleeper.
When they put a piece in correctly, that’s right.
OK, let’s have a look at the form.
Right, thanks. I’ve never filled in one of these before, so ...
Well, let’s just do it in pencil first. So, name of designers .. .
Well, Ann helped me with some of the electronics work.
Then you must put her name in as well. Right.. . Ann Ray.
Sorry. It’s ANNE and her surname is spelt R-E-A.
Good start! OK . .. REA. And age is easy. You’re both 16. What have you
called the design? Keep it short.
What about jigsaw puzzle design for visually handicapped?
Too long. Just say blind puzzle, that’ll do.

Q21
Q22

Q23

Test 3
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:
JOHN BROWN:
MARY COLLINS:

OK.
Right now, size of equipment?
I’ve got it noted down here .. . urn, yes, length, sorry, width is 20 cm.
OK.
Length is 50 cm, and then the depth is ... well, it’s very little.
What would you say? I think you can be approximate.
I’d say 2.5 cm.
And the electricity supply? Is it mains operated?
No it isn’t, it’s actually battery.
OK, write battery.
Fine, OK. It’s the next bit that I’m really not sure what to put.
Well, special features means, what is really new about this, you know,
suitable for the group you made it for.
Well, it’s safe for children.
That’s fine. Put that in.
OK, and of course we think it’s educational.
There you are, you’ve done it. Anything else?
Well, I think the price is good.
That’s probably the most important factor.
OK ... cheap price.
Which brings us on to the next bit. What’s the cost?
Well, the pieces we made out of old wood .. . they cost, ooh, $5.
And the electrics?
They were more expensive . .. say, $9.50. Brilliant. Now what do they
mean by other comments?
It’s just a chance for you to say anything about the equipment, and
problems you envisage.
Well, we would really like help with making plastic instead of wooden
pieces.
Well, put something like, need help to make plastic pieces.
OK. And the other thing is, we’d like to develop a range of sizes.
That’s fine, then, just put that. And the last bit is, when will you send the
equipment?
Well, we’ve got a lot of work on at the moment and we want to get it as
good as we can.
Well, say 25 June?
Can’t we make it later?
Well, the last date is 1 July. Why not say that?
OK, that’s what I’ll put.
So that’s the lot!
That’s brilliant. Thanks very much, Mrs Collins. I’ll send it off
straightaway.
Glad to be of help. Very best of luck to you both.
Thanks, bye.
Bye.

Q24

Q25
Q26
Q27

Q28

Q29

Q30

141

Tapescripts

SECTION 4
PAULA:

TED:

142

Today I’d like to introduce Ted Hunter, who used to rear sheep and poultry but
who is here to tell us about a rather unusual type of livestock that he’s been
concentrating on in the last few years. Ted Hunter is a member of the
Domesticated Ostrich Farming Association, and is here to tell us about the
possibilities of breeding and rearing these birds here in this country.
Thank you, Paula. When you look at international restaurant menus and
supermarkets they all tend to feature the same range of meats - beef, lamb,
chicken, pork, that sort of thing. But people are always interested in something
different and we’re now finding that farming can bring new types of meat to our
tables. The kangaroo is one animal that’s now being farmed for its meat and eaten
outside Australia, where it comes from. It looks and tastes rather like rabbit,
though it’s slightly darker in colour, but it is rather tough, so that’s a problem for
some people. Crocodiles are also being farmed for their meat. This is rather like
chicken, pale and tender, and it’s getting quite fashionable. Some people also find
it’s rather fatty, but I think it makes a really tasty sandwich. Now a third type of
meat becoming increasingly available, and the one that I think is by far the nicest
of the three, is ostrich, which most people say has a similar taste and texture to
beef. However, it’s much better for you than beef, as we’ll see later. Most people
think of ostriches as wild animals, but in fact ostriches have been farmed in South
Africa since around 1860. At first they were produced for their feathers. In Africa
they were used for tribal ceremonial dress and they were also exported to Europe
and America where they were made into ladies’ fans and used for decorating hats.
Later, feather fans and big. decorated hats went out of fashion but ostriches were
still bred, this time for their hide. This can be treated to produce about half a
square metre of leather - very delicate, fine stuff of very good quality. At the
same time, some of the meat was used for biltong - the air-dried strips of meat
popular in South Africa as a sort of fast food. However, recently there’s been
more and more interest in the development of ostrich farming in other parts of the
world, and more people are recognising its value as a food source. Ostrich meat is
slightly higher in protein than beef- and much lower in fats and cholesterol. It
tastes good too. A series of European taste tests found that 82% of people prefer
ostrich to beef. And one ostrich produces a lot of meat - from around 30 to 50 kg,
mostly from the hindquarters of the bird. Farmed ostriches don’t need African
climates, and in fact ostrich farming is now becoming well established in other
parts of the world. However, setting up an ostrich farm isn’t something to embark
on lightly. Mature breeding birds are very expensive - even a fertilised ostrich egg
isn’t cheap so you need quite a bit of capital to begin with. Then the farmer needs
special equipment such as incubators for the eggs. The young chicks are very
dependent on human minders, and need a lot of attention from the people looking
after them. In addition, ostriches can’t be intensively farmed - they need space
and exercise.

Q31
Q32

Q33
Q34
Q35
Q36

Q37

Q38
Q39

Test 3
But in spite of this they make good farming sense. A cow produces only one calf a
year whereas a female ostrich can lay an egg every other day. And because the
farmers can use incubators and hatched chicks are nourished well and protected
from danger, the failure rate on farms is very low indeed and almost all the
fertilised eggs will hatch out into chicks which will in turn reach maturity. This is
very different from the situation in the wild, where the vast majority of chicks will
die or be killed before they grow up into mature ostriches. So it’s possible, once
the initial outlay has been made, for the farmer to be looking at very good profit
margins indeed. Ostrich farming is still in its early days outside Africa but we
hope that ostrich meat will be freely available soon and before long will be as
cheap as beef.

Q40

143

Tapescripts

TEST 4
SECTION 1
SARAH:
JOHN:
SARAH:
JOHN:
SARAH:
JOHN:
SARAH:
JOHN:
SARAH:
JOHN:
SARAH:
JOHN:
SARAH:
JOHN:
SARAH:

John, I’ve just had some good news. Susan has had her baby.
Do you know when she had it?
Yesterday. The tenth of August.
Oh, my father was born on August the tenth. Give me the details and I’ll make a
note for everyone at work.
OK.
Well, was it a boy or a girl?
It’s a boy.
And what are they going to call him?
Tom. Tom Lightfoot. It sounds quite good, don’t you think?
Yes, that has quite a good ring to it.
You know he’s quite a big baby. He weighed four and a quarter kilos when he
was born. That does sound big, four and a quarter kilos.

SARAH:
JOHN:

And he’s long too, forty-six centimetres.
Mmmm. Tall parents. He’ll grow up to be over two metres, I’d say.
With masses of black hair, curly black hair. You know, we should go and visit
them in hospital. What about tomorrow afternoon at around 1 pm?
Yes, OK.
Where should we meet? ... Ah, I could come and pick you up at your house, if
you like.
Yes, that would be wonderful. My car is still off the road.
Just refresh my memory. What’s the address again?
It’s 15 Chesterfield Road, Paddington.
It’s next to the library, isn’t it?
Not exactly. It’s next to a bank. The State Bank actually. The library is opposite
us, on the corner.
That’s right, and there’s a garage on the other street corner. I remember now.
So, you’ll pick me up at a quarter to one and we’ll be there at one easily.

SARAH:

Now what should we take? We must take them something.

JOHN:
SARAH:

I always think flowers are good to take to someone in hospital, don’t you?
Well, not really. Everyone always brings flowers and they don’t last. I think it’s
much better to take a pot plant, so she can take it home with her.
Yes, but then she has to remember to water it. What about a big box of
chocolates?
OK, chocolates sound fine. We should get something for the baby too. What do
you think?
Yes, you’re right. What do you think of something like baby shampoo or talcum
powder?

JOHN:
SARAH:

JOHN:
SARAH:

JOHN:
SARAH:

JOHN:

JOHN:
SARAH:

JOHN:

144

Example

Q1

Q2

Q3/Q4
Q5

Q6

Test 4

SARAH:
JOHN:
SARAH:
JOHN:
SARAH:
JOHN:
SARAH:

JOHN:
SARAH:
JOHN:
SARAH:
JOHN:
SARAH:

Or we could get a little hat, or something like that.
We don’t know the size, or the right colour, do we?
I think we should get something they wouldn’t normally buy. What about a soft
toy of some sort?
Yes, a soft toy.
What about a teddy bear?
I could get one early tomorrow at the market and I could probably get the
chocolates there too.
Good.
So you’ll pick me up at a quarter to one at my place and I’ll make sure that I’ve
got the presents.
You must remember how much you paid for the gifts, so I can pay you back for
half. If they’re going to be from both of us, I would like to go shares.
OK. I’d say the chocolates would be about $15 for something nice and not too
small and the toy would be around $35 or so, I’d think.
Good, that’ll be fine. About $25 each then. Good, I’ll pick you up then on
Sunday at twelve forty-five.
OK.
See you then. Bye.

Q7
Q8/Q9

Q10

SECTION 2
PRESENTER:

Good evening. Tonight s show comes to you from the Good Home
Exhibition in Duke’s Court, where we’ve been trying out some of the latest
gadgets on show here and getting our resident expert - Liz Shearer - to tell
us which ones are worth buying and which will die a death.
LIZ SHEARER: Well, hello. Yes, John, I’ve been investigating four new household gadgets
and sorting out the advantages and disadvantages and then really deciding
what are ‘Must buys’, what are ‘Maybe buys’ and what are ‘Never buys’.
Let’s start with this vacuum flask for keeping drinks hot. Well... I felt this
had quite a lot going for it, most of all is the fact that it contains no glass
and is therefore unbreakable to all intents and purposes. It’s made of
stainless steel which is guaranteed for 20 years .. . hope that’s long enough .
.. and it’s true what the manufacturer claims - that it does maintain heat for
18 hours. So that’s pretty good. On the down side, it really works out to be
quite expensive and, much more surprisingly, it unfortunately leaves a
strange taste . . . you know when you’ve drunk from it... so all in all, my
recommendation would be it’s got plenty of advantages, but it is rather
expensive so I’d say you should maybe buy it. Moving on to a natty little
device .. . the Whistle Key Holder. Basically this is where you whistle and
the key holder gives off a high pitched noise and flashes light so you can
find it. One advantage of this model is that it also has a small light. You
press the button and this means you can find keyholes easily. I also felt the
small size was a real advantage. On the

O11
Q12
Q13

Q14

145

Tapescripts

PRESENTER:

weaker side, I did find the noise unpleasant. Which I m sure the designers
could have done something about. And I found that it didn’t work through
metal, so it’s mainly useful for finding in coat pockets, cushions, etc. But
taken as a whole I thought it was a masterpiece of design and would
highly recommend it.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------The third gizmo is called the Army Flashlight because it was developed
initially for military use. It works by squeezing the handle to generate the
power. Its advantages are that it can be used for outside activities, and also
... and this is one of the surprising features... it does work underwater. My
main objection to it though was although it did work in these conditions,
this model gave off a weak light. So my recommendation I’m afraid would
have to be to avoid this one. The decoy camera was last on my list. This is
a fake video camera which you fix to your wall to scare off burglars. The
advantage of this model is something which makes it look very realistic ...
its flashing light. On the down side, it was quite difficult to fix to the wall.
However, burglary is such a major problem these days that it is worth the
effort, so this gets my strong recommendation.
OK. Thanks for that, Liz.

Q15
Q16

Q17
Q18 019
Q20

SECTION 3
BRYSON:
AMINA:

BRVSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:

AMINA:

146

Well, Amina, thanks for letting me have your draft in such good time.
Oh, that’s alright. I was just very anxious to hear what you think of it. You can
see that I decided to change the topic - I had been interested in looking at
Barings Factory.
Oh, I think the hospital was a much better choice. In fact... well... I have to
say that I thought it was good.
Oh?
There’s still lots of work to be done .. .
Oh yes ... of course.
But there’s plenty of good ideas. It opens well and the first chapter is fine but
the middle section really stood out for me ... most interesting.
That’s amazing because I really didn’t find it a bit easy to write .. .
How long did you work on the whole thing?
Well, I spent about two or three weeks reading and doing general research and
then I dashed the writing off very quickly ... so about four weeks in all.
Well, that’s about par for the course. You’ve got a while yet to make the
changes.
Oh right... no problem ...
Right. Let’s have a look at my notes here. OK. Starting with section headings
... the broad divisions are good but you’ll have to re-do the actual headings.
I’ve made some suggestions in the margins ...
OK. Thanks.

Q21

Q22
Q23

Example

Test 4
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:

Now, this information on local housing ... I can see why you put it there but it
really isn’t relevant to the approach you’ve taken.
I think I see what you mean.
Now . . . what did I say about the interviews?
I worked very hard on those. I really thought they were valuable.
They are, Amina, but they’re very complex and rather unclear at the moment.
You’re going to have to spend a bit of time making the data a lot clearer.
OK ... as long as 1 don’t have to remove them altogether . . .
No, don’t worry.
What about the chronology ... the list of dates? I wasn’t sure whether I should
rewrite those.
My advice on that is to take them out. I feel it makes the whole piece appear too
simplistic.
OK, if it’ll help.

BRYSON:

Now, there are a couple of other books I’d like you to look at. Have you got a
pen? Right. . . Approaches to Local History by John Mervis . . .

AMINA:

Right.. .
And then I think you need to think about ways of representing interview data.
Have a look at Sight and Sound by Kate Oakwell.
Sight and Sound.
Then you know I’m going away on holiday next week . . .
Yes.
So when you’ve made the changes I suggest you show the work to your Support
Tutor.
Support Tutor . . . right. . .
Then you do the proof reading . . .
Proof reading . . . uh-huh. When by, do you think?
I’d aim for 29 June and after that you should get it laser printed . . . but be
careful because the computer centre closes on 10 July.
And then I hand it in to ... ?
Oh, the Faculty Office as usual.
OK, that’s fine. I think I’m all set now! Thanks very much for all your help.
A pleasure. See you when I get back.
Yep. Thanks, Dr Bryson. Bye.
Bye.

BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:
AMINA:
BRYSON:

Q24

Q25

Q26

Q27

Q28

Q29
Q30

SECTION 4
Good afternoon. I’m Paula Bundell and I am giving you the lectures on Environmental Noise
this term. Today we are going to look into the effects of noise on a planned housing estate in a
particularly difficult part of the new Manchester Park area. This site is not as bad as some 1
have researched in the past. The Blacktown airport is closed from 6pm to 7am and this is a
great advantage to the site. The only noise after dark

147

Tapescripts
is from the highway and the traffic is somewhat reduced between 7.30pm and 5.30am. So,
the people most affected by the noise will be, I expect, housewives. By the time most of the
students and workers have arrived back home in the evening during the week the noise will
have abated to a fairly large extent. The weekends are still a problem of course, but the
traffic is certainly reduced on Saturdays to a large extent and even more so on Sundays. Of
course modifications to houses will be necessary at a site like this and they come at a
significant cost to the developer and home buyer. The modifications I am about to outline
will add about $25,000 to the price of a newly-built house. That will still mean a cheaper
house than in a less noisy and more desirable area. A bit of background would not go astray.
I understand that you are all familiar with the proposed development site at Manchester
Park. It’s a particularly difficult one in terms of noise with the highway along the eastern
perimeter and the Blacktown airport not 3 kilometres away to the north. Of course, those
nearest the highway will be the worst hit, with heavy traffic noise as well as the noise from
the light planes overhead. As you all know, the normal noise threshold for private housing is
55 decibels. At this site the levels have been recorded as high as 67 decibels.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------The construction of the houses has to be somewhat modified from houses in most areas. In
the houses on the highway and in the noisiest areas of this site there will be a need for
specialised double glazing and special acoustic seals will have to be fitted to the doors. All
exterior doors in this especially noisy pocket will have to be solid core wood doors with
hinges. Every house built on this site, not just those adjacent to the highway or nearest to the
airport, will require high density insulation materials in the roof. Not only will all the roofs
need insulating, the exterior walls will be required to be double brick. All ceilings will
require double thickness plaster board to be used in the construction. In the noisiest areas
mechanical ventilation will have to be installed in the exterior walls. In those areas with
sealed windows it will be necessary to fit fans with absorbers to cut out the noise in those
particular houses. Air conditioning units could also be fitted in the ceilings of such houses
but this is substantially more expensive than fans, and may not be needed on this site.
Coming back now to the double glazing I mentioned before. Specialised double glazing
requires a larger air gap between the inner and outer glass than normal double glazing. The
gap must be at least 7 centimetres. The thickness of the glass is also a factor, 8 millimetres
on the outside and 6 on the inside pane. It is essential that the glass be thicker on the outside
than on the inside and that the gap between the panes of glass be a minimum of 7
centimetres. Obviously, the noise factor will have to be taken into consideration with the
layout of the houses. Living areas will have to be designed at the back of the houses away
from the highway. Bedrooms and living rooms will have to be built towards the back, and
for those houses closest to the highway two layers of plasterboard will be needed for the
interior bedroom walls. Those rooms constructed at the front of the houses should be
garages, laundries, kitchens, bathrooms and dining rooms. I have come to the conclusion
that this development should go ahead, but with various acoustic modifications according to
the position of the block in relation to the highway and intersection.

148

Q31
Q32
Q33
Q34

Q35

Example

Q36

Q37

Q3S

Q39
Q40

Answer key
TEST 1
LISTENING
Each question correctly answered scores 1 mark. Please note! CORRECT SPELLING NEEDED IN ALL
ANSWERS. ( Where alternative spellings are accepted these are stated in the key.)

Section 1, Questions 1-10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

(the) city centre (itself) ACCEPT center
(£) 250 (pounds) (to) (£) (about) 500 (pounds)
(a) garden
(£) 325 (pounds)
(the) water (bill(s))
(the) telephone/phone (rental)
Wednesday/Wed (afternoon)
(your) employer
two/2 weeks’/wks’ // (a) fortnightV/fourteen/ 14
days’
10 (1/one) month(‘s) rent NOT one month

Section 2, Questions 11-20
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

(her) daughter (Anna) // Anna // Ana // (her) child
(a) practice // practices
(about) 6 // six (doctors)
(about) 4 // four (doctors)
better // more efficient // faster
elderly // old // older
back problems/trouble // bad backs
9 // nine (am) // 9.00 // nine/9 o’clock
EITHER ORDER
B // unemployed people
E // pregnant women
(£) 5 // five (pounds)

Section 3, Questions 21-30
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

Politics
(West) Africa
1990 to 1992 NOT 1993
Teach South
rural co(-)operative
Geography
(Form) 5/five/V
(very) homesick // missed (my/his) family //
homesickness
favourite subject ACCEPT favorite
(many) (useful) applications

Section 4, Questions 31—40
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

A
B // osteoporosis
B // relaxation therapy
C // its response to injury often results in more
damage
A // for a maximum of two days
B // worsens existing back pain
B // Recommended in certain circumstances
A // Strongly recommended
B // Recommended in certain circumstances
C // Not recommended

If you score ...
0-17

18-27

28-40

you are highly unlikely to get
an acceptable score under
examination conditions and we
recommend that you spend a
lot of time improving your
English before you take IELTS.

you may get an acceptable
score under examination
conditions but we recommend
that you think about having
more practice or lessons before
you take IELTS.

you are likely to get an
acceptable score under
examination conditions but
remember that different
institutions will find different
scores acceptable.

149

Answer key

ACADEMIC READING
Each question correctly answered scores 1 mark. Please note! CORRECT SPELLING NEEDED IN ALL
ANSWERS.

Reading Passage 1, Questions 1-14
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

iv // Undeveloped for centuries
i // How the reaction principle works
v II The first rockets
vii // Rockets for military use
B // space travel became a reality
D // from the late nineteenth century to the present
day
A // the Chinese
A // the Chinese
B // the Indians
E //the Americans
B
E
F
G

Reading Passage 2, Questions 15-28
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

B // are strongly linked to cigarette smoking
A // inhibits the flow of oxygen to the heart
C // formation of blood clots
NO // N
NOT GIVEN // NG
YES // Y
NOT GIVEN // NG

22
23
24
25
26
27
28

E // is more harmful to non-smokers than to
smokers
G // is more likely to be at risk of contracting
various cancers
H // opposes smoking and publishes research on
the subject
A // a finding of the UCSF study
B // an opinion of the UCSF study
B // an opinion of the UCSF study
C // a finding of the EPA report

Reading Passage 3, Questions 29-40
29 iv // Explaining the inductive method
30 vii // The role of hypotheses in scientific research
31 iii // The testing of hypotheses
32 v // Anticipating results before data is collected
33 vi // How research is done and how it is reported
34 & 35 IN EITHER ORDER
B
F
36 YES // Y
37 NO // N
38 NOT GIVEN // NG
39 YES // Y
40 D // to help Ph.D students by explaining different
conceptions of the research process

If you score...
0-13
you are highly unlikely to get
an acceptable score under
examination conditions and we
recommend that you spend a
lot of time improving your
English before you take IELTS.

150

14-25
you may get an acceptable
score under examination
conditions but we recommend
that you think about having
more practice or lessons before
you take IELTS.

26-40
you are likely to get an
acceptable score under
examination conditions but
remember that different
institutions will find different
scores acceptable.

Answer key

TEST 2
LISTENING
Each question correctly answered scores 1 mark. Please note! CORRECT SPELLING NEEDED IN
ALL ANSWERS. ( Where alternative spellings are accepted, these are stated in the key.)

Section 1, Questions 1-10

Section 3, Questions 21-30

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

21 B // staff selection
22 C // disagrees with the rest of the group
23 A // colleagues’ ability
24 C // already a part of job interviews
25 selection (procedure)
26-27 EITHER ORDER (the) (ancient) Chinese
(the) military // army
28 (almost) two thirds // f
29 experts NOT expert
30 A // describe one selection technique

(the) Main Hall NOT Hall
(the) Director (of) (Studies) // DOS
(the) Student(s) Advisor/Adviser
eleven/11 o’clock //11.00 (am)
placement/English (test)
L // Library
MH // Main Hall
CL // Computer Laboratory
SR // Staff Room
SCR // Student Common Room

Section 2, Questions 11-20

Section 4, Questions 31-40

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

31
32
33

(overseas)(student(s’)) (tuition) fees
(the) domestic (area)
(essay(s’)) deadlines NOT ressay(s)
social (life)
outings // trips
KOUACHI
3269940
ten/10(am)-/to4/four(pm)
(an) appointment(s)
waiting list

If you score...
0-17
you are highly unlikely to get
an acceptable score under
examination conditions and we
recommend that you spend a
lot of time improving your
English before you take IELTS.

34
35
36
37
38
39
40

secondary
14 // fourteen (year olds/years old)
overlap // overlapping ACCEPT over(-)lap //
over(-)lapping
underside // underneath // bottom NOT side
on paper // in two dimensions
3/three(-)dimensional // 3(-)D
MUST STATE ALL THREE white, grey/gray,
brown
C
D
A

18-27
you may get an acceptable
score under examination
conditions but we recommend
that you think about having
more practice or lessons before
you take IELTS.

28-40
you are likely to get an
acceptable score under
examination conditions but
remember that different
institutions will find different
scores acceptable.

151

Answer key

ACADEMIC READING
Each question correctly answered scores 1 mark. Please note! CORRECT SPELLING NEEDED IN ALL
ANSWERS.

Reading Passage 1, Questions 1-13
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

NOT GIVEN // NG
NO // N
YES // Y
YES // Y
NO // N
South African
French
Spanish
temperate
early spring NOT spring
2-5 // two to five
sub-tropical
South African tunneling/tunnelling/
tunneler/tunneller (species)

Reading Passage 2, Questions 14-28
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

v // Governments and management of the
environment
vii // Farming and food output
ii // The environmental impact of modern farming
iv // The effects of government policy in rich
countries
i // The probable effects of the new international
trade agreement
G // Clearing land for cultivation
C // Increased use of chemical inputs

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

F // Soil erosion
B // Disappearance of old plant varieties
C // was causing significant damage to 20 per
cent of farmland
B // used twice as much fertiliser as they had in
1960
D // farm diversification
C // their policies do not recognise the long term
benefit of ending subsidies
A // encourage more sustainable farming
practices in the long term
A // Environmental management

Reading Passage 3, Questions 29-40
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

NOT GIVEN // NG
YES // Y
YES // Y
NOT GIVEN // NG
YES // Y
NO // N
NO // N
role sign
ritual
role sign
role set
C // a critical study of the importance of role
signs in modern society

If you score...
0-15

16-26

27-40

you are highly unlikely to get
an acceptable score under
examination conditions and we
recommend that you spend a
lot of time improving your
English before you take IELTS.

you may get an acceptable
score under examination
conditions but we recommend
that you think about having
more practice or lessons before
you take IELTS.

you are likely to get an
acceptable score under
examination conditions but
remember that different
institutions will find different
scores acceptable.

152

Answer key

TEST 3
LISTENING
Each question correctly answered scores 1 mark. Please note! CORRECT SPELLING NEEDED IN
ALL ANSWERS. ( Where alternative spellings are accepted these are stated in the key.)

Section 1, Questions 1-10

Section 3, Questions 21-30

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Rajdoot
Park View (Hotel)
London Arms
208657
no/non(-)smoking section/area
Lentil curry
fifty pound(s)/£50 deposit // deposit (of) £50/fifty
pound(s)
8 choose/decide (on)/select (the) menu
9 4 November
ALTERNATIVE FORMS ACCEPTED
10 (the) Newsletter

21
22
23
24

Section 2, Questions 11-20

Section 4, Questions 31-40

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

(£)9.50
year // annum NOT annual
reception NOT Sports Centre
card
book
weekdays
Reception (Area)
Dance Studio
Squash Courts
Fitness Room

Anne Rea
(both) 16 (years old)
Blind (Jigsaw) Puzzle NOT Jigsaw
MUST BE IN ORDER 20 (cm) 50 (cm) 2.5 (cm)
// 2 and a half (cm)
25-27 IN ANY ORDER safe for children (it’s)
educational price (is) good // inexpensive // not
expensive // cheap (price) // (is) good price
28 electrics NOT electric
29 plastic pieces // in plastic NOT pieces
30 1 July
ALTERNATIVE FORMS ACCEPTED

rabbit (meat)
(rather) tough
beef
(ladies’) (feather) fans
(delicate) (fine) (good quality) leather
meat
A // has more protein than beef
C // the price of ostrich eggs
C // need looking after carefully
B // farmed birds are very productive

If you score ...
0-14
you are highly unlikely to get
an acceptable score under
examination conditions and we
recommend that you spend a
lot of time improving your
English before you take IELTS.

15 25
you may get an acceptable
score under examination
conditions but we recommend
that you think about having
more practice or lessons before
you take IELTS.

26-40
you are likely to get an
acceptable score under
examination conditions but
remember that different
institutions will find different
scores acceptable.

153

Answer key

ACADEMIC READING
Each question correctly answered scores 1 mark. Please note! CORRECT SPELLING NEEDED IN ALL
ANSWERS.

Reading Passage 1, Questions 1-12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

FALSE // F
FALSE // F
FALSE // F
NOT GIVEN // NG
TRUE // T
TRUE // T
TS // Technical Series
AT // Artefact Types
FA // Field Assemblages
AT // Artefact Types
FA//Field Assemblages
SE // Social Experience

24
25

15
16
17
18
19
20

v // Early research among the Indian Amazons
i // Amazonia as unable to sustain complex
societies
vi // The influence of prehistoric inhabitants on
Amazonian natural history
NO // N
YES // Y
NOT GIVEN // NG
NO//N
YES // Y

If you score ...
0-14
you are highly unlikely to get
an acceptable score under
examination conditions and we
recommend that you spend a
lot of time improving your
English before you take IELTS.

154

YES // Y
C // were an extremely primitive society
A // are evidence of early indigenous
communities
B // has been shown to be incorrect by recent
research
C // change present policies on development in the
region

Reading Passage 3, Questions 26-40

Reading Passage 2, Questions 13—25
13
14

21
22
23

26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

A // They were less able to concentrate
B // influences animal feeding habits
B // reaction to certain weather phenomena
NOT GIVEN // NG
FALSE // F
FALSE // F
TRUE // T
TRUE // T
NOT GIVEN//NG 35-37 IN ANY ORDER
B // rainy weather
D // high serotonin levels
E // sunny weather
38 B // hot weather
39 A // daylight
40 F // time cues

15-26
you may get an acceptable
score under examination
conditions but we recommend
that you think about having
more practice or lessons before
you take IELTS.

27-40
you are likely to get an
acceptable score under
examination conditions but
remember that different
institutions will find different
scores acceptable.

Answer key

TEST 4
LISTENING
Each question correctly answered scores I mark. Please note! CORRECT SPELLING NEEDED IN
ALL ANSWERS, (Where alternative spellings are accepted, these are stated in the key.)

Section 1, Questions 1-10

Section 3, Questions 21-30

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

4.25 // 4 1/4 // four and (a) quarter
46 // forty-six
A // State Bank
D // Library
C // Garage
(a) (box) (of) chocolates
(a) (soft) toy // (a) teddy (bear) // (a) bear
(at the) market(s)
(at the) market(s)
($)35/thirty-five (dollars)

Section 2, Questions 11-20
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

glass
eighteen/18 hours/hrs
(a) (strange) taste
(the) small size // small // (the) size
metal
A
outside/outdoor activities // outdoors
underwater // under/beneath water
(a) weak light
flashing light

B // hospital
C // the middle section
C // found it difficult to do
C // remove completely
B // rewrite
C // remove completely
Sight and Sound
Support Tutor NOT Tutor
proof reading // proof read
10 July
ALTERNATIVE FORMS ACCEPTED

Section 4, Questions 31-40
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

7.30pm (to/and) 5.30am NOT 7.30 to 5.30
housewives // housewifes
Sunday(s)
(about) $25,000/twenty-five thousand dollars
NOT 25,000
C // 67 decibels
C // for ceilings
W // for walls
C // for ceilings
D
C

If you score ...
0-15

16-26

27-40

you are highly unlikely to get
an acceptable score under
examination conditions and we
recommend that you spend a
lot of time improving your
English before you take IELTS.

you may get an acceptable
score under examination
conditions but we recommend
that you think about having
more practice or lessons before
you take IELTS.

you are likely to get an
acceptable score under
examination conditions but
remember that different
institutions will find different
scores acceptable.

155

Answer key

ACADEMIC READING
Each question correctly answered scores 1 mark. Please note! CORRECT SPELLING NEEDED IN ALL
ANSWERS.

Reading Passage 1, Questions 1-13
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Los Angeles
London
Singapore
London
Los Angeles
YES // Y
YES // Y
NO // N
NO // N
NO // N
A // one
D // particulate matter
C // the old and ill

15
16
17
18
19
20

YES // Y
NO // N
NO // N
NOT GIVEN // NG
YES // Y
YES // Y
D // informative

Reading Passage 3, Questions 28-40
28
29
30

Reading Passage 2, Questions 14-27
14

21
22
23
24
25
26
27

C // the success of the movement’s corporate
image
D // It had a clear purpose and direction
BOTH FOR ONE MARK D // 1918 AND E //
1928
(selling) advertising (space)
colour scheme // (three) colours // purple, white,
(and) green
(the) Woman’s Exhibition
NO // N

31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

A // establish whether increased productivity
should be sought at any cost
C // had identical patterns of organisation
C // the staff involved spent a number of months
preparing for the study
supervision // leadership // management
productivity
reduced // cut // decreased
(group methods of) leadership
overstaffed
reduced // cut // decreased
C // Changes in productivity
D // Employees’ feelings of responsibility towards
completion of work
G // Employees feel closer to their supervisors
F // Employees’ opinion as to extent of personal
support from management

If you score...
0-15

16-27

28-40

you are highly unlikely to get
an acceptable score under
examination conditions and we
recommend that you spend a
lot of time improving your
English before you take IELTS.

you may get an acceptable
score under examination
conditions but we recommend
that you think about having
more practice or lessons before
you take IELTS.

you are likely to get an
acceptable score under
examination conditions but
remember that different
institutions will find different
scores acceptable.

156

Answer key

GENERAL TRAINING TEST A
READING
Each question correctly answered scores 1 mark. Please note! CORRECT SPELLING NEEDED IN ALL
ANSWERS.

Section 1, Questions 1-13
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

B
E
E
C
D
B
BOTH REQUIRED FOR ONE MARK, IN
EITHER ORDER A (and) B
BOTH REQUIRED FOR ONE MA RK, IN
EITHER ORDER B (and) D
FALSE // F
TRUE//T
FALSE//F
NOT GIVEN // NG
TRUE//T

Section 2, Questions 14-26
14
15
16
17
18
19

TRUE // T
FALSE // F
TRUE // T
TRUE//T
NOT GIVEN//NG
FALSE // F

20
21
22
23
24
25
26

(University) Halls of Residence
4/four weeks/wks
10 to/-l 5 // ten to fifteen
(Waikato) Students’ Union
(Waikato) river
picturesque
(ongoing) travel (arrangements)

Section 3, Questions 27-40
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

C // The coal industry and the environment
v // Coal as an energy source
vi // Coal and the enhanced greenhouse effect
vii // Research and development
iv // Environment protection measures
D // trends in population and lifestyle
B//18 per cent/18%
B // developing new gasification techniques
A // more cleanly and more efficiently
D // runoff water containing sediments
NO // N
YES // Y
YES // Y
NOT GIVEN // NG

If you score ...
0-13
you are highly unlikely to get
an acceptable score under
examination conditions and we
recommend that you spend a
lot of time improving your
English before you take IELTS.

14-30
you may get an acceptable
score under examination
conditions but we recommend
that you think about having
more practice or lessons before
you take IELTS.

31-40
you are likely to get an
acceptable score under
examination conditions but
remember that different
institutions will find different
scores acceptable.

157

Answer key

GENERAL TRAINING TEST B
READING
Each question correctly answered scores 1 mark. Please note! CORRECT SPELLING NEEDED IN ALL
ANSWERS.

Section 1, Questions 1-13
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

NO // N
YES // Y
NO // N
NO // N
(on the) bottom (of jar)
$5 // five dollars
(company’s) retailing manager
place of purchase
$50,000
ii // Save money by not paying interest
ill Payment options
vi//Applying for a card
v // Location of stores

Section 2, Questions 14-27
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

iii // Film Appreciation Society
ix // United Nations Student Club
viii // Debating Club
iv // Drama Society
leave (a) message
annually // once a year // every year // each year
NO // N

21
22
23
24
25
26
27

YES // Y
NOT GIVEN // NG
NO // N
YES // Y
NO // N
NO // N
YES//Y

Section 3, Questions 28-40
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

F
A
G
E
B
C
NOT GIVEN // NG
YES // Y
YES // Y
YES // Y
NO // N
NOT GIVEN // NG
NO // N

If you score...
0-15
you are highly unlikely to get
an acceptable score under
examination conditions and we
recommend that you spend a
lot of time improving your
English before you take IELTS.

158

16-30
you may get an acceptable
score under examination
conditions but we recommend
that you think about having
more practice or lessons before
you take IELTS.

31-40
you are likely to get an
acceptable score under
examination conditions but
remember that different
institutions will find different
scores acceptable.

Model and sample answers for writing
tasks
TEST 1, WRITING TASK 1
SAMPLE ANSWER
This is an answer written by a candidate who achieved a Band 5 score. Here is the examiner’s comment:
The writer does what is required of her in terms of task fulfilment, and the message can be followed, but
the weaknesses in grammatical control and in spelling cause difficulty for the reader. Complex sentence
structures are attempted, but the greatest levels of accuracy are found in basic, simple structures.

This chart shows us that Japanese tourists go abroad for travelling in a decade
and Australian’s share of marketing for Japanese tourists. Between 1985 and
1995 Japanese tourists travelling abroad was dramatically increased. In 85 there
was about 5 milions traveller go abroad. Since 85 number of traveller went up
dramatically until 40. It was alomost twice then between 90 and 93 the number
rimain stateable, which is about 12 millions. From 93 to 95 it rose slightly.
Therefore in 1995 there were about 15 millions people went abroad.
I am going to write about the other chart, which is Australian’s share of
Japanese’s tourist market. This is also between 1985 and 1995. About 2 million
Japanese tourist went to Australia in 1985. Between 85 and 89 people went
there is increased sharply, which is almost 3 times more. In 1990 it fall number
slightly but from 90 to 94 number is went up. However 94 to 95 is not so went up
number of people who went to Australia. It rimain is the same or slightly
decreased.

159

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

TEST 1, WRITING TASK 2
SAMPLE ANSWER
This is an answer written by a candidate who achieved a Band 4 score. Here is the examiner’s comment:
The majority of this answer has no relation to the task set: the first half is completely irrelevant and the
second part is only marginally related to the topic. The candidate has therefore been penalised for this.
There is little meaningful message, and grammatical control is weak.

I DISAGREE
Nowadays, football is the most popular game in the world. We can find there are many
different teams who plays this football. There are dividing into 3 division: division one,
division two and division three. Each divisions have different skills. The skills that they have
are depend on the manager. He is the one who teachs the player how to play. By playing
football, there are many advantages and disadvantages. Firstly, the team can earn a lot of
money. If we compare the income in division one and division two are really different. The
division one will get more than division two. Because as we know, the team in division one,
they shows to the people that they are able to play better than the others. For example:
David Beckham (the player of Manchaster United). He can earn for about £45.000
£50.000/week. It’s unbelievable. Even the prime minister in the UK just got for about
£11O.OOO/year. Secondly, they can get a lot of spectators which makes the income
increased. In one match, they can earn for about 20 or 30 million pounds. Actually, it’s
really high. For one ticket (VIP) it can cost us a lot of money. I think for about £100 or over.
That is for one person. How if we count for a million person? There are also many
disadvantages: like from the task which says that the releasing patriotic emotions in a safe
way. Actually, I don’t really agree about that: like 2 weeks or 3 weeks ago, there are 2 fans
of Leeds United got shots. And it makes them died. Many people come and give them
flowers and also the clothes which shown they’re sad about that.
There are other sport games like tennis. Tennis is also popular. In playing tennis there
are also have advantages and disadvantages. This games shows how they against each
other. The advantages are can earn a lot of money, can attract the spectators (audience).
There are also have disadvantages of this games, for example: two years ago, when
Monica Sales and Steffi Graph are on the match. They play against each other then, one of
the Steffi’s fan can’t stand anymore, he killed (shots) Monica Sales. That makes Monica
Sales have to stop the game. The people are all thinking to take her to the hospital.
Because of that, it makes Monica Sales stopped from playing tennis for about a year. But
now, she has started again.
In my opinion, these sport can ease the international tensions and also can make
death from year to year become increase. So, it is very dangerous.

160

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

TEST 2, WRITING TASK 1
MODEL ANSWER
This model has been prepared by an examiner as an example of a very good answer. However, please note that this
is just one example out of many possible approaches.

The chart shows that Britain, among the four European countries listed, has spent most
heavily on the range of consumer goods included. In every case, British spending is
considerably higher than that of other countries; only in the case of tennis racquets
does another country, Italy, come close.
In contrast, Germany is generally the lowest spender. This Is most evident in
photographic film, where Germany spends much less than Britain. Germany only
spends more than another country, France, in two cases; tennis racquets and
perfumes.
Meanwhile, France and Italy generally maintain middle positions, averaging
approximately similar spending overall. Specifically, France spends more on CDs and
photographic film but less on tennis racquets than Italy does. Italy’s spending on
personal stereos is only marginally greater than that of France, while spending on toys
is equal between the two.
It is clear from the data given that there are some significant differences in spending
habits within Europe.

161

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

TEST 2, WRITING TASK 2
MODEL ANSWER
This model has been prepared by an examiner as an example of a very good answer. However, please note that this
is just one example out of many possible approaches.

Overall, I disagree with the opinion expressed, I would like to begin by pointing out that
‘traditional skills and ways of life’ are not automatically of one country, but of a culture
or community.
In many ways, the history of civilisation is the history of technology: from the discovery
of fire to the invention of the wheel to the development of the Internet we have been
moving on from previous ways of doing things. Some technologies, such as weapons
of mass destruction, are of negative impact. Others, such as medical advances,
positively help people to live better or longer, and so very much help traditional ways of
life. Surely, few people would seek to preserve such traditions as living in cavesl
Interestingly, technology can positively contribute to the keeping alive of traditional
skills and ways of life. For example, the populations of some islands are too small to
have normal schools. Rather than breaking up families by sending children to the
mainland, education authorities have been able to use the Internet to deliver schooling
online. In addition, the Internet, and modern refrigeration techniques, are being used to
keep alive the traditional skills of producing salmon; it can now be ordered from, and
delivered to, anywhere in the world.
In conclusion, without suggesting that all technology is necessarily good, I think it is by
no means ‘pointless’, in any way, to try to keep traditions alive with technology. We
should not ignore technology, because it can be our friend and support our way of life.

162

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

TEST 3, WRITING TASK 1
MODEL ANSWER
This model has been prepared by an examiner as an example of a very good answer. However, please note that this
is just one example out of many possible approaches.

The data shows the differences between developing and industrialised countries’
participation in education and science.
In terms of the number of years of schooling received, we see that the length of time
people spend at school in industrialised countries was much greater at 8.5 years in
1980, compared to 2.5 years in developing countries. The gap was increased further in
1990 when the figures rose to 10.5 years and 3.5 years respectively.
We can see a similar pattern in the second graph, which shows that the number of
people working as scientists and technicians in industrialised countries increased from
55 to 85 per 1,000 people between 1980 and 1990, while the number in developing
countries went from 12 to 20.
Finally, the figures for spending on research and development show that industrialised
countries more than doubled their spending, from $200bn to $420bn, whereas
developing countries actually decreased theirs, from $75bn down to $25bn.
Overall we can see that not only are there very large differences between the two
economies but that these gaps are widening.

163

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

TEST 3, WRITING TASK 2
MODEL ANSWER
This model has been prepared by an examiner as an example of a very good answer. However, please note that this
is just one example out of many possible approaches.

The issue of children doing paid work is a complex and sensitive one. It is difficult to
say who has the right to judge whether children working is ‘wrong’ or ‘valuable’.
Opinions will also differ as to ‘learning’ benefits: no doubt teachers and factory owners,
for example, would have varying concerns.
An important consideration is the kind of work undertaken. Young children doing
arduous and repetitive tasks on a factory production line, for example, are less likely to
be ‘learning’ than older children helping in an old people’s home. There are health and
safety issues to be considered as well. It is an unfortunate fact that many employers
may prefer to use the services of children simply to save money by paying them less
than adults and it is this type of exploitation that should be discouraged.
However, in many countries children work because their families need the additional
income, no matter how small. This was certainly the case in the past in many
industrialized countries, and it is very difficult to judge that it is wrong for children today
to contribute to the family income in this way.
Nevertheless, in better economic circumstances, few parents would choose to send
their children out to full-time paid work. If learning responsibilities and work experience
are considered to be important, then chitdren can acquire these by having light, parttime jobs or even doing tasks such as helping their parents around the family home,
which are unpaid, but undoubtedly of value in children’s development.

164

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

TEST 4, WRITING TASK 1
SAMPLE ANSWER
This is an answer written by a candidate who achieved a Band 7 score. Here is the examiner’s comment:

This is a good account of the information presented in the graph, although occasionally the
organisation of the data is slightly unusual. The writer grasps all the key points, however,
and supports these with figures, before providing a summary of the main points. Sentence
structures are more than adequate, although the writer has some problems with the use of
tenses and prepositions. There are minor examples of unsuitable register (e.g. ‘turned out’,
‘disastrous’, and one contracted verb form), but as there are only a few instances of this,
the candidate has not been penalised.

According to the results of the labour-force research published recently, the following
conclusions can be drawn from it:
In March, 1993, United States had seven percent of their workforce which might not
seem disastrous until compared with Japan, where 2.5% were unemployed. However, the
unemployment rate in United States began declining slowly since March 1993, and
reached 5% mark in the middle of 1996. Japan turned out to be less lucky, as their
unemployment rate doubled in three years. From then on. the percentage of unemployed
workforce in United States remained roughly the same — about 5% until March 99,
although there were minor falls and rises in the unemployment rate.
As for Japan, the percentage of unemployed fell rapidly by 0.5—0.6% after March 1996,
but from summer 1996 and onwards it grew steadily and without any falls to reach 5.0%
boundary in March 1999.
The major conclusion that I’ve drawn using the graph, is that number of unemployed in
USA decreased by about 2.0% in the course of six years, while in Japan it actually
increased by 2.5% percent. As a result, in March 99, both Japan and US had about 5%
of their work force unemployed.

165

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

TEST 4, WRITING TASK 2
SAMPLE ANSWER
This is an answer written by a candidate who achieved a Band 6 score. Here is the examiner’s comment:
The writer expresses a point of view, but the ideas show little development and the argument does not
go anywhere. The writing is well-organised, however, and can be followed with little difficulty.
Sentence structures are sufficiently varied, but grammatical and lexical control is quite often faulty (e.g.
subject/verb agreement, incorrect use of tenses, mass/count nouns).

In balancing the world economic growth, the underdevelopment of the Third World
Nations have been drawn to the attention of the developed countries of the Western.
Thus, governmental policies and interference in the agricultural business of the
poorer nations were made to secure their dominant source of the economy. Many
discussions among economists and politicians also put their focus on the other aspects.
That is, to improve the health, education and trade for the developing countries.
However, the improvements cannot be made by these countries, but more external
assistance and aids should be done.
Because of the shortage of food supply, the people in poorer nations (i.e. Africa)
are esily prone to disease, hunger and death. When natural or environmental disastres
happen, they are threaten with their lives. Education cannot be well developed as a
result of frequent droughts, famines and disease spreading. The other countries,
while emphasising on the development of agriculture in the Third World, cannot really
give the solution to the cyclical problem which has been existing for a long time. It is
time to consider the consequences of all the waste of efforts in trying to help the
economic growth of the Third World and to think from the other perspectives. The
richer countries have the power to rebuilt the Third World by taking care the
essentials - health, education and trade. More aids for providing the medicine,
educational needs and materials can be done by the richer countries. The assistance
of trade and developing business in the poorer countries also can be of a great help to
the poorer nations.
If the richer countries can be more serious about the essential issues of how a
nation develops, and well consider the special situations and circumstances those
poorer nations are facing, the improvements will be more efficiently made. The
governments of developed countries are, in some ways, responsible - though not
obliged - for the future of those developing countries.

166

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

TEST A, WRITING TASK 1 (GENERAL TRAINING)
MODEL ANSWER
This model has been prepared by an examiner as an example of a very good answer. However, please note that this
is just one example out of many possible approaches.

Dear Ms Barnes,
I am writing concerning the position of Assistant Office Manager that 1 am due to begin
next Monday. However, a problem has arisen.
As you know, I currently work for my uncle’s food-packing business, and you will
remember from my interview that I have gained valuable experience there.
Unfortunately, he has had to go into hospital for an operation, leaving my aunt in
charge of both the home and the business. She has asked me, as this is a particularly
busy time of year, to stay on and help her with the running of the office.
I realise this will be inconvenient to you, but very much hope that, given the
circumstances, you would be prepared to allow me to take up my position with you two
weeks later than planned.
I would like to emphasise that I remain very keen to work with you, and that I will be
gaining further useful experience during this time.
I look forward to hearing from you.

Yours sincerely,
John Forbes

167

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

TEST A, WRITING TASK 2 (GENERAL TRAINING)
MODEL ANSWER
This model has been prepared by an examiner as an example of a very good answer. However, please note that this
is just one example out of many possible approaches.

Today, education has become a priority for many parents seeking to secure a good
Mure for their children in this rapidly changing world. They believe that if their children
apply themselves and work hard at school, then they will increase their opportunities
for going to higher education and eventually getting a good job. Of course they are
right, and as access to the best education and best jobs is becoming more competitive,
then it is true that children have to make the best of their study time when they are
young.
However, the parents who do not allow their children sufficient free time for leisure
activities outside school hours, are misguided. Such activities are far from being a
waste of time for the children simply because they are not academic. It is important to
remember that children need to develop skills other than intellectual ones, and the best
way to do this is through activities such as sports, games and playing with other kids. If
they cannot play make-believe games, how can they develop their imagination? How
can they learn physical co-ordination or learn important social lessons about winning
and losing if they do not practise any sports? Many children form strong, personal
relationships with the friends they play with, and without the opportunity to do this, they
could grow up emotionally immature or unformed.
Finally, I think it is also important to remember that children need to relax as well as
work. If everything they do must have some educational or academic relevance, then
they will soon get tired of studying altogether, which is the last thing parents would
want.

168

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

TEST B, WRITING TASK I (GENERAL TRAINING)
SAMPLE ANSWER
This is an answer written by a candidate who achieved a Band 7 score. Here is the examiner’s comment:
The response to the task is fluent, although there is room for expansion and clarification of some
aspects of the task. The message is well-organised and can be followed throughout, with the writer
making good use of ‘signpost’ words. There are some problems with word choice and with word
formation (e.g. ‘big noise’, ‘distractive’), but the range of sentence structures is varied and wellcontrolled for accuracy.

Dear Sir/Madam,
I am writing with regard to the article in your newspaper dated 7th September. My
house is situated within 20 minutes walk of the airport. Please allow me to point out
the problems which have caused serious damage on the residential area. I am fully
sure that the problems must be aggravated if the plan is carried out to expand the
airport and Increase the number of flights.
First of all, the low-flying aeroplanes are utterly distractive. They make such a big
noise that I cannot concentrate on housework at all. What is worse, I am woken up by
the late hour flights at midnight; I was diagnosed as Insomnia the other day. I should
call this situation noise pollution.
Secondly, I am afraid that the expansion of the airport may reduce the plot of
land for the playground which is under construction near the airport at the moment.
To sum up, I strongly disagree with the plan. I would appreciate if you could
possibly write the article about the problems and disagreement as I said above.
Yours faithfully,

169

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

TEST B, WRITING TASK 2 (GENERAL TRAINING)
SAMPLE ANSWER
This is an answer written by a candidate who achieved a Band 6 score. Here is the examiner’s comment:
The answer is an adequate response to the task, although there are not many ideas and there is little
development of these. The response reads fairly easily, however, and the writer’s intention is
usually clear. There is a variety of sentence structures, and although these are not always
grammatically accurate, the errors do not interfere with the message. There are signs of vocabulary
limitations.

The today’s family-life changed a lot. Many parents are divorce, a lot of mothers and
fathers have their job’s far away from home. The children are often alone and lonley
... but what are the reasons for this happening?
First of all, I think that the modern technology is one of the main reason for this
problem. Many parents work in their nearest cities from their home. They work with
computer in big offices and came home late at night. However, they have no time to
look after their children.
In the past, families used to work "as a family". Every member worked hard and
helped the family to survife, for example farmers. Furthermore, the education used
to be controled by the parents, not like today’s day-schools with teachers and
professors. On the other hand, there must be a solution to bring separeted families
together. At my point of view, families should spend their free time together. I am
thinking about weekends or the time after work. Children need their parents even
when they are older. To give a reasonable example: I often go out with my parents,
mostly for a dinner. Then my brother and I speak about our future plans or something
else. An intensiv conversation is a possible solution. A similar way is, to divide your job
into half-part work-times and spend your free time leftover with your loved persons.
A point against this statement is to have financial problems.
To sum up I wish that every family is as close as possible with each other, if they like
that.

170

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

Sample answer sheets

171

Model and sample answers for writing tasks

172

